#### **What works and how much is needed**


**What is cerebral palsy?**


Cerebral palsy is an umbrella term for a broad group
of physical disorders that affect movement and posture
due to injury to the developing brain. While it is a lifelong physical disability, it can change over time.


**Why is early intervention so critical?**


Cerebral palsy can now often be accurately diagnosed as
early as three months of age. At this time, a baby’s brain
is developing rapidly, which makes it ideal for harnessing
neuroplasticity: the brain’s ability to adapt or rewire itself.


Research shows that getting access to intervention as early
as possible will give a child their best chance of learning,
regardless of the condition or diagnosis. This means early
diagnosis is crucial because it enables access to early
intervention supports as soon as possible.



**Who is Cerebral**

**Palsy Alliance (CPA)?**


CPA is recognised as the leading
provider of evidence-based
therapy, life skills programs
and services for people living
with cerebral palsy and other
neurological conditions. Our
research foundation supports
the world’s best and brightest
researchers to find ways to

improve current interventions
and search for ways to prevent
and cure cerebral palsy.


**What’s in this guide?**


This guide helps parents of children aged 3-6 with cerebral palsy
understand what areas of development can be affected, and how early
intervention can improve outcomes in each of these areas. Children with
cerebral palsy usually continue to learn and refine their motor skills up
until the age of 7, so we recommend that early interventions addressing
all affected developmental domains be undertaken until children start
primary school. Attention to learning, behaviour, communication and
social skills are also vital for this period as children prepare for school.


This guide also provides important facts about the best cerebral
palsy-specific early intervention therapies and supports. It covers:




- Task-specific training


- Gross motor skills such

as walking and mobility


- Hips and musculoskeletal
development


- Management of muscle tone


- Hand function and fine

motor skills




- Swallowing, eating
and drinking


- Communication


- Self-care skills


- Learning


- Behaviour


- Social skills and friendships


- Support for parents and carers.



**Delivery of therapy**


In-person therapy is the
most common mode of

early intervention delivery.


However the growth and
improvement of online platforms
such as telepractice means many
of the interventions discussed in

this guide can now be delivered
in your home via telepractice.


Speak with your therapist to
discuss the most appropriate
way for your child to access
specific interventions, whether
it is via in-person, telepractice,
or a combination of the two.



This guide provides general information only. This information is not intended to replace specific advice offered by your physicians or other
health professionals. Please consult with your doctor or health team for advice personalized for you, your family history and where you live
(as recommendations do vary around the world, and vary widely depending upon your own situation).



1


## **Key highlights from the guide**

**Task-specific training**


        - Age 3-6 is an important time for skill development in children with cerebral
palsy and customised intervention programs based on their goals should
be available for every child


        - Task-specific training aimed at a particular goal is more effective than
therapy that is generalised


        - Children need at least 14 hours of intervention per goal. If your child
has two identified goals, they will need at least 28 hours of intervention.
If they have three goals, then 42 hours at least.


Find out more on page 5


**Gross motor skills such as walking and mobility**


        - Motor training-based early interventions that are goal-directed and taskspecific are recommended as the gold standard for children with cerebral
palsy, because they induce neuroplasticity and produce functional gains


        - Gait training, treadmill training, and hydrotherapy, are additional interventions
that may support your child develop their gross motor skills


        - Assistive technology and ankle foot orthoses can enable your child to
optimise their independence.


Find out more on page 7


**Hips and musculoskeletal development**


        - Children with cerebral palsy are at risk of hip displacement and joint
contracture as they grow. These conditions can be painful


        - Children with cerebral palsy should receive regular surveillance of their
musculoskeletal development and timely interventions


        - Interventions such as serial casting can have short-term benefits


        - Sometimes orthopaedic surgery is needed to keep bones and muscles aligned.


Find out more on page 10


**Management of muscle tone**


        - Altered muscle tone such as spasticity can affect a child’s control of movements,
contribute to the development of muscle contractures, and can also cause pain


        - Botulinum toxin can help reduce spasticity in injected muscles in the short term


        - Some oral medications can also help muscle tone.


Find out more on page 12



2


**Hand use and fine motor skills**


- Task-specific, motor training-based early interventions are recommended as the gold standard
for children with cerebral palsy, because they induce neuroplasticity and produce functional gains


- Children need at least 14 hours of intervention per goal. If your child has two identified goals,
they will need at least 28 hours intervention. If they have three goals, then 42 hours at least


- Setting a goal and actual practice of those goals requires less hours to make improvements
in goals than generalised upper limb training


- Discuss with your therapist the best way to structure training.


Find out more on page 14


**Swallowing, eating and drinking**


- Swallowing problems are common and often not recognised


- Children with cerebral palsy should have regular check-ups for swallowing problems


- Adjusting what and how your child eats or drinks can help.


Find out more on page 16


**Communication**


- While problems with communication are common, there are many ways to support the development
of your child’s ability to communicate


- These include expressive and receptive language therapy, speech therapy and assistive technologies


- Communication partner training can help too.


Find out more on page 17


**Self-care skills**


- Task-specific, motor training-based early interventions are the gold standard for children
with cerebral palsy, because they induce neuroplasticity and produce functional gains


- Sleep issues are common. If left untreated, they can have a significant impact on your child and family


- Health professionals should work closely with you and your family to identify the most appropriate
options to help with sleep difficulties.


Find out more on page 20


**Learning**


- Children with cerebral palsy may experience difficulties with specific areas of their thinking
and problem-solving skills. Issues can include difficulties controlling or maintaining their
attention, difficulties holding things in mind momentarily, being unable to control inappropriate
behaviours, or difficulties in planning, organising or thinking of solutions to problems


- Supports are available for assessing, assisting and making adaptions for your child’s needs,

both at school and at home.


Find out more on page 22



3


**Behaviour**


- Maintaining the wellbeing of the family unit can help families stay together


- Parenting programs can reduce any problematic behaviours and emotional
issues your child may experience, and can improve parents’ confidence, wellbeing
and relationship with each other.


Find out more on page 24


**Social skills and friendships**


- Pre-schoolers are encouraged to have regular, weekly contact with other
children to support their social development


- Supporting the development of social skills involves understanding the
developmental level of the child and their current patterns of social interactions


- A program can then be developed to teach children to better understand
social situations and acquire new skills.


Find out more on page 26


**Support for parents and carers**


- Parents of children with cerebral palsy find counselling and social support
helpful to manage overwhelming feelings such as stress, anxiety or
depression and to cope with the stress of extra caring responsibilities.


Find out more on page 28



4


## **Task-specific training**

Task-specific, motor training-based early interventions are the gold standard for children
with cerebral palsy because they induce neuroplasticity and produce functional gains.



Task-specific practice is also useful for the development
of other skills such as thinking and language skills.



Child-active therapy approaches should:


- Be goal-based


- Involve practice of the actual task


- Involve high amounts of repetition.


Practice can be organised over either a short
intensive period, or it can be distributed over a
number of weeks or months. The type of practice
will vary according to the goals identified, and
each child’s and family’s individual preferences.



These approaches are also called child-active
approaches, because the child actively practices
real-life tasks, usually in real-life environments, for
the purpose of gaining or consolidating real-life skills
that they want to learn. Traditional approaches have
relied on specific techniques where the child is often
a passive recipient, but it is now clear that traditional
approaches don’t help children learn new skills.


**Goal-directed therapy**



Goal-directed therapy (GDT) involves the
child and family setting goals that are needed
for everyday life, then the child practising
specific activities to reach those goals.


The goal might need to be broken down
into parts or modified to start with. As the
child’s skill level improves, the task can be
made harder and should be practiced in
real life as much as possible. For example,
practising climbing stairs that are in the
child’s home is more beneficial than
practising climbing stairs in a therapy room.
The task/s and the environment are often

changed to help the child better learn skills.


GDT should be offered to all children who
have motor goals, at the just right challenge
for their level of ability. GDT may be carried
out in individual or group sessions as well
as intensive camp models. Regardless of
the way GDT is conducted, all children
should have individually identified goals
to work on and the goals and activities
should be motivating and fun for the child.


Depending on the specific goals chosen,
weekly access to physiotherapy and/or



occupational therapy is recommended.
While the number of hours of practice per
goal has not yet been established for all
gross motor goals, for goals involving the
upper limbs (arms and hands), between

14 and 25 hours is needed to achieve

a goal using GDT. The time taken for
a child to reach goals will vary.


Support typically involves designing a
customised home program for parents
to carry out with their child. This program
should be written down and adjusted
regularly as the child’s skills develop.
Therapists should ensure the home
program can be implemented by the child’s
carers using a parent coaching framework.


How quickly a child is able to learn a new
task or movement skill using GDT will
depend on many different factors including
age, type of cerebral palsy, individual
motivation and understanding of the task/
skill (cognition), as well as opportunities
to practice the task/skill.


GDT can also be used for non-motor-based

goals such as play, self-care, communication,
cognitive and school-based activities.



5


**Cognitive orientation**
**to occupational performance**


Cognitive orientation to occupational performance
(CO-OP) is a goal-oriented intervention which uses
specific cognitive strategies to enable a child to learn
or improve important skills. The aim is for the child
to improve their motor and/or self-care skills, as well
as improve their ability to plan and work out the steps
needed to learn new skills. This learning process can
be applied in different contexts, and also to learn

other new skills and activities.



Children are introduced to a strategy called GOAL,
PLAN, DO, CHECK, which will be used to help their
motor learning. CO-OP is suitable for children aged
5 or more who have the thinking ability needed to
identify possible solutions to achieving goals. Therapists
must have specialised training to use this approach.


Interventions that focus on functional goals
and involve actual practice of the goals need
less hours of practice than therapy that is
generalised (not goal-directed).


There are two ‘models’ of motor-based

therapy practice that can be used.


A distributed practice model involves a lower
duration and frequency of practice delivered
over a longer time period, for example goaldirected training.


A massed practice model includes high duration
and frequency of therapy over a shorter period
of time, for example an intensive therapy camp.


Both types of practice are effective.



Age 3-6 is an important
time for skill development in
children with cerebral palsy,

and customised intervention

programs based on their
goals should be available
for every child.


Task-specific training
aimed at a particular goal
is more effective than
therapy that is generalised.


Children need at least

14 hours of intervention

per goal. If a child has two
identified goals, at least

28 hours intervention will

be needed. If they have
three goals, then 42

hours at least.



6


## **Gross motor skills such as walking and mobility**

Gross motor skills are those that require use of the larger muscles of the body. They are
needed for everyday activities such as holding up the head, sitting and standing and walking.



Cerebral palsy nearly always impacts gross motor
skills, which affects a child’s mobility. Many children
will walk without any assistance, while some will use
a wheelchair. And there is much variety in between,
where some children may have difficulties with slopes,
uneven surfaces and stairs, while others may have
difficulties with balance activities such as running,
hopping and jumping. Other children may walk with
the assistance of a walking aid such as a walking
frame or crutches and use a stroller or wheelchair

for longer distances.



By age 5, most children with cerebral palsy will have
reached 90% of their gross motor skills however the
quality of their movement can change as they get
older. Children with more severe cerebral palsy will
reach their gross motor skill potential at a younger
age. For these children, accessing assistive technology,
for example early powered mobility such as a Wizzy
Bug, as early as possible is recommended.



In addition to GDT and CO-OP (described above), the following interventions
can help children achieve their gross motor goals.


**Gait training**


- Gait training is specific practice of walking, in a range of contexts, to improve
either the quality of the walking pattern or endurance


- Gait training can improve walking speed, but is less effective in improving other
gross motor skills. Gait training should be implemented with a GDT approach.


**Treadmill training**


- Treadmill training can improve speed of walking, walking endurance and, to a lesser extent,
gross motor function in children with cerebral palsy


- Treadmill training can be done with the support of a harness if a regular treadmill can’t be used


- Treadmill training is most effective when the child is actively using their muscles


- Overground walking training should always be used alongside treadmill training, so that
gains in walking can be transferred to real-life situations.


**Hydrotherapy**


- Hydrotherapy is an activity or exercise that is performed in warm water


- For some children, hydrotherapy may be a useful addition to their GDT program while
for others it may provide a freedom of movement not easily achieved in other programs.



7


**Assistive equipment for walking and mobility**


- Some children will need specialised devices to
assist with walking


- Assistive equipment includes walking frames,
crutches and walking sticks. Some children will
use different equipment for different activities,

such as crutches to walk inside and a wheelchair

to move much longer distances. Children start
to show their own preferences for which
equipment works in which situations


- Some children will need walking devices for a
short period before independent walking develops,
while others will always need a frame to move
(or mobilise) in different environments


- Even children who may not achieve independent
walking will benefit from mobilising in a supportive
walker for fun, fitness and socialisation.



**Assistive equipment for physical activity**


- Some children will need specialised devices
or adaptions to participate in physical activity


- Assistive equipment includes adapted tricycles,

bikes and other devices


- Learning to use these devices should be part
of a GDT program.


**Ankle foot orthoses**


- Ankle foot orthoses (AFOs) are plastic splints
commonly used for children with cerebral palsy
to improve the position of the foot for standing
and walking


- AFOs can make small improvements to walking
and gross motor abilities


- It is not clear whether wearing AFOs can prevent
the development of permanent contractures,
that is, the shortening or tightening of muscles


- If a child uses AFOs, there should be an

appropriate GDT program




**Assistive technology for early mobility**


- Ride-on cars and powered mobility will support
social-emotional and mobility skills


- Children who need assistive technology such
as a Wizzy Bug should use it as early as possible


- Active robotic gait training (eg using an exoskeleton)
in young children with mild to moderate gross
motor impairment can improve the distance the
child is able to walk independently. Some robotic
devices passively move the child’s legs, and are
less likely to be effective




- Specific computer games have been designed
for people with cerebral palsy and can be used
to promote engagement and participation as
part of a therapy program.


The amount of intervention needed to support
mobility outcomes will depend on the goals and



**Outcomes from specific**
**interventions for gross motor skills**


Children with cerebral palsy continue
to learn new motor skills during early
childhood. A sufficient amount of motor
training will assist children to maximise
their movement potential and promote
independence in daily activities that
require mobility.


Motor training-based early
interventions that are goal-directed
and task-specific are recommended
as the gold standard for children
with cerebral palsy, because they
induce neuroplasticity and produce
functional gains.


Gait training, treadmill training,
hydrotherapy, assistive equipment,
assistive technology and ankle
foot orthoses can all help children
develop their gross motor skills.



9


## **Hips and musculoskeletal** **development**

Some children with cerebral palsy have hip displacement,
in which the hip bone doesn’t sit properly in the hip socket.
This can cause pain and make walking difficult.


Many children with cerebral palsy have contractures, in which the
muscles are shorter and tighter than usual. Contractures are most likely
to occur in joints where the muscles around them are affected by spasticity.



Hip displacement and contracture can cause pain and loss of function.
Frequent monitoring and early use of evidence-based treatments is
essential to minimise these problems. This approach lasts for life.
Different interventions will work at different times for different people.


**Active surveillance**


           - Children with cerebral palsy should receive regular surveillance
of their musculoskeletal development and timely intervention


          - Active surveillance and monitoring through programs such as CPUP
in Sweden and CPA’s _CP Check-Up™_ are considered best practice.


**Serial casting**


           - Serial casting might be considered when a shortened muscle is stopping
a child achieving their goal, such as reaching or walking, or to make
dressing easier. It can increase the range of movement of a muscle, and
may improve a child’s function for a short time after the casts are applied.
As it has a short-term effect casting may need to be repeated, especially
during growth spurts


           - Serial casting involves putting a plaster and/or synthetic cast on the arm
or leg for a short time, then replacing it with another. This is repeated
several times, and helps to gradually stretch muscles


          - Serial casting may be recommended to coincide with another intervention
such as botulinum toxin therapy to help minimise any discomfort that may
otherwise arise due to the presence of spasticity. Serial casting four weeks
after botulinum toxin improves the length of the muscle more than serial
casting alone


           - After serial casting, active strength and goal-directed training are
recommended to make use of the functional range gained.


**Orthopaedic surgery**


           - Orthopaedic surgery might be considered for some children in the early
primary school years if serial casting is not effective, to align muscles and
joints to help children maintain function and prevent pain. Orthopaedic
surgery is more common in later primary than early primary years.



10


Hip surveillance should start with a first hip
x-ray at 12-24 months of age, then every
year after that. Infants who are not standing
or walking by 18 months need more frequent
hip x-rays.


_CP Check-Up™_ appointments should be
offered annually.





It is likely that serial casts are most effective
when reapplied every three days, usually
with three or four casts in a row.








## **Management of muscle** **tone and spasticity**

Many children with cerebral palsy have
problems with muscle tone and movement.


The most common problem is spasticity, in which
stiff muscles make movement difficult.


Some children with cerebral palsy have dyskinesia,
which means involuntary movements. These can be:


- Twisting and repetitive movements known as dystonia


- Slow, ‘stormy’ movements known as athetosis


- Dance-like irregular, unpredictable movements

known as chorea.


Both spasticity and dyskinesia can affect a child’s
performance and control of movements, can contribute
to the development of muscle contractures and bone
problems, and be a cause of pain.



There are treatments that can

help reduce the effects of spasticity
and dystonia in children with
cerebral palsy. There is very little
known about treating chorea

and athetosis.


Assessment and selection

of these treatments is done

by a multidisciplinary team
including rehabilitation physician,
orthopaedic surgeon, neurologist,
neurosurgeon, physiotherapist
and occupational therapist.




**Botulinum toxin**


- Botulinum toxin is given by injection into a muscle or
muscles, temporarily reducing spasticity. The effects
wear off over 4 months, so it is common for young
children to have a series of botulinum toxin injections


- Botulinum toxin in combination with other

interventions (e.g. serial casting, occupational
therapy, physiotherapy, electrical stimulation,
orthoses) can help improve range of motion, hand
function, gross motor function and goal attainment.


**Selective dorsal rhizotomy**


- Selective dorsal rhizotomy is a surgical procedure
where sensory nerve rootlets in the spinal cord that
contribute to spasticity in the lower limbs are cut.
This causes a permanent reduction in lower limb
spasticity and improvements in walking


- Some children with spastic diplegic cerebral
palsy may benefit from this procedure


- Rehabilitation after selective dorsal rhizotomy
is long and intensive.


**Intrathecal baclofen**


- Baclofen is a medication that can help muscles
with spasticity or dystonia to relax. It can be given
intrathecally, which means the medication is
given into the space around the spinal cord
via a thin tube (catheter) attached to a pump


- This needs a surgical procedure to insert the
pump and catheter, but it means baclofen can
be used often in small doses


- Intrathecal baclofen may be considered for children
with spasticity or dystonia affecting most of their
body, and that significantly affects personal care
and comfort (usually children functioning at
GMFCS levels IV and V – see appendix).


**Oral medications**


- Some oral medications can reduce spasticity
and dystonia


- Diazepam is effective for the short-term treatment
of spasticity


- Oral baclofen reduces spasticity and dystonia, but can
cause side-effects such as drowsiness and seizures


- There are other oral medications that can be

considered in particular situations.



**Outcomes from interventions**

**to manage muscle tone**


Appropriate treatment can reduce
spasticity, dystonia and pain in children
with cerebral palsy. Botulinum toxin

combined with other interventions

is effective in improving function
and reducing spasticity.


Altered muscle tone such as

spasticity can affect a child’s

control of movements, can

contribute to the development

of muscle contractures, and

can cause pain.


Botulinum toxin can help
reduce spasticity in injected

muscles in the short term.


Some oral medications can

also help muscle tone.



13


## **Hand function and fine motor skills**

Some children with cerebral palsy have difficulties using one hand (unilateral) or both
hands (bilateral). Others have no problems with their hands.


Towards the end of early childhood years, goals relating to hand function become focused on getting
ready for school.



Ideally, children would have their classroom support needs assessed before starting school. They may
also receive and be trained in the use of assistive technology, especially if writing by hand is challenging.


In addition to GDT and CO-OP (described above), the following specific interventions
have also been shown to improve hand function and fine motor skills.



**Constraint-induced**

**movement therapy**


- Constraint-induced movement

therapy (CIMT) is useful
for children with unilateral

cerebral palsy. It involves
constraining the unaffected
hand with a mitt, sling or cast.
At the same time, the child
practises carefully chosen
activities to improve the

control and coordination

of the affected hand


- CIMT has been shown

to improve hand function,
activities and participation
when offered at a specified
dose. It is not effective to
only wear a restraint,

without the exercises.


**Bimanual therapy**


- Bimanual therapy focuses
on a child’s ability to use
their two hands together to
carry out everyday activities


- It involves the use of specific

verbal instructions and

behaviour prompts to

teach the child how the two

hands can work together.



**Hand therapy home programs**


- Hand therapy home programs
are an important part of
therapy. They usually involve
designing a customised home
program that includes written
instructions and photographs
for parents to carry out the

intervention with the child in

their natural environment


- A home program can be used
in conjunction with a specific

motor training intervention
approach.


**Hand/arm orthoses/splints**


- Orthoses or splints for the

hand and arm can be used

to support functional activities
or to optimise hand position
for stretching


- Using splints might give small
extra benefits when used in
conjunction with a motor
training-based approach


- Many children find hand
splints uncomfortable
and this can affect their
willingness to wear them.

It is not clear whether

wearing hand splints can

prevent a contracture
from developing




- Splints are usually prescribed
as part of a therapy program
addressing a variety of
goals. They are usually used

in combination with other

therapy interventions such

as GDT.


**Taping therapy**


- Taping aims to support or
stop muscles turning on,
to support joints, and to
optimise the position of the
hand and thumb so they can
function more effectively


- Taping might be useful
for children with tightness

or weakness in their hand


- Taping should be combined
with task-specific motor
training such as GDT


- Therapists will recommend
taping where appropriate.


**Handwriting therapy**


- Some children with cerebral

palsy will write by hand


- The best therapies need
children to practice
handwriting while using their
thinking skills. A minimum of

20 hours is needed to achieve

significant improvement.



14


**Assistive technology for hand function**


- Children who have significant difficulty using
their hands should have options to access
computers and toys. This can be a specialised
keyboard, mouse or joystick, using eye-gaze
technology or using a switch


- This can improve participation in a range of
activities such as mobility, play and accessing
a computer or iPad


- Customised mounting arms and systems can
be explored to provide the best position for
the assistive technology to be effectively used


- Specialised seating systems are important
in the daily life of children with more severe
cerebral palsy, as good positioning helps children
use their hands to their maximal capacity






- Access to assistive technology can also improve
cognitive and social skills.


It depends on the goals and type of
intervention. We don’t have enough
evidence to be sure how much therapy
is enough to achieve goals. But current
research suggests that a total of 14–25
hours of practice is needed, combining
therapy with home practice.


The exception is children with unilateral
cerebral palsy, where one side of the body
affected, who aim to improve general upper
limb function through CIMT and bimanual
therapy. These children need 30 to 40
hours of intervention.










## **Swallowing, eating and drinking**

Swallowing problems (known as dysphagia) affect how someone eats,
drinks and manages their saliva. Swallowing problems are common in
children with cerebral palsy and are often not detected or discussed.


Regular check-ups for swallowing problems are essential.


If a child grows slowly, loses weight or has frequent chest infections,
we recommend they see a GP and/or go to a specialised hospitalbased feeding clinic. Some children will benefit from seeing

a dietitian.


Management involves adjusting what and how the child eats
or drinks. Options may include:


    - Making fluids thicker or solids smoother


    - Positioning the child for optimal posture and head control


    - Teaching carers to use physical prompts around the child’s lips and
jaw to promote better control and movements, e.g. mouth closure


    - Parent education about how to manage the amount of food
and the pace of feeding and oral hygiene


    - Gradually increasing the child’s tolerance of certain types
or textures of foods


    - The SOS approach to feeding, which integrates motor, oral,
behavioural/ learning, medical, sensory and nutritional factors
and approaches


    - Assistive technology such as specialised cups and spoons,
and appropriate and customised seating


    - Surgical interventions, which may be needed when feeding
problems are severe and long lasting:


– Fundoplication is a surgical procedure to strengthen
the barrier to acid reflux


– Gastrostomy is the surgical placement of a non-oral
feeding tube to prevent or reverse growth failure, and

to prevent aspiration pneumonia.


This depends on the goals and the type of intervention.
We don’t have enough evidence to be sure how much
therapy is enough to achieve goals. In line with research
on motor disorders, we recommend 14 hours as a

minimum per goal.



**Outcomes from**

**intervention for**

**swallowing, eating**
**and drinking skills**


Timely intervention
to improve feeding
skills can prevent or
shorten the episodes
of poor growth,
promote weight gain
and prevent chest
infections. They might
also help to improve
behaviour, sleep and
feeding routines, and
reduce parental stress.


Swallowing problems

are common and are

often not detected

or discussed.


Regular check-ups
for swallowing
problems are

essential.


Adjusting what and

how the child eats

or drinks can help.



16


## **Communication**

Communication is complex and involves different modes such as speaking, vocalising,
use of gestures, and facial expressions. There are also augmentative and alternative
communication systems (AAC), which allow people to communicate using technology
in a variety of ways.



Communication is complex and twoway. Children can have a range of skills
in expressing themselves, to understand
others, and be understood. Some of these
skills may be affected by cerebral palsy

more than others.


It is very common for children with CP to
have speech difficulties. Some are unable
to speak and rely on non-verbal forms
of communication.



Communication difficulties are more
commonly associated with children with the
type of CP that affects their whole body or the
dyskinesia type. Associated impairments such
as intellectual disability and epilepsy are also
commonly associated with communication
difficulties. Children who do communicate
verbally may have difficulties with receptive
language (understanding others), expressive
language (expressing intention or using
words and grammar), speech sounds and
intelligibility or social communication.


Speech and language pathologists provide
comprehensive assessments to identify
key areas to work on and will recommend
interventions to support the most effective
communication for each individual child.


Interventions to support communication goals may focus on strategies to develop speech, strategies to
develop alternative methods of communication or a combination of both. Therapy should take place in the
environment where the child needs to communicate, which typically includes both home and pre-school.



**Expressive language therapy**


- Expressive language therapy is a general term
that encompasses therapy focusing on developing
language skills such as sentence structure,
grammar and vocabulary


- Expressive language therapy can include
verbal and AAC strategies. This is referred to

as multimodal communication. Children with

cerebral palsy with speech difficulties and
delayed language development are typically
encouraged to use multimodal communication


- Expressive language therapy typically includes
practising the intervention goal in daily routines
and in play, such as with shared reading,
frequent modelling and feedback.


**Receptive language therapy**


- Receptive language therapy refers to therapy
to improve the child’s ability to understand when
others speak. This may include understanding
meanings of words, instructions, concepts,

stories and idioms


- Receptive language therapy typically includes
use of multiple strategies such as visual
schedules and gestures.


**Speech therapy**


- Speech therapy specifically targets speech
sounds and the components of speech production
in order to improve speech intelligibility


- Speech therapy is based on principles of
motor learning and involves repetitive practice.


**Stuttering therapy**


- Stuttering therapy aims to lengthen the
stutter-free speech through graded activities.


**Assistive technology for communication**


- Assistive technology for communication can
be low-tech, such as communication boards,

or high-tech, such as computers and speechgenerating devices. Software options range
from play to communication solutions that
can ‘grow’ with the child




- Alternative and Augmentative Communication
(AAC) is an intervention approach that uses
manual signs, communication boards with symbols
or pictures, and speech generating devices to
augment or replace the individual’s speech


- AAC employs the child’s full communication
abilities that the child may not be able to use
with speech alone


- AAC systems can be used by a child pointing
using their hands, eyes or head movement, as

well as other methods such as a mouse or a switch


- AAC intervention might focus on learning new
sentence structures, operating the AAC system,
finding symbols using AAC to communicate,
and taking turns in conversation


- Aided language stimulation promotes language
development by combining the use of speech
and AAC, which include the designated AAC
system, gestures and signs


- AAC promotes speech and language development.
AAC allows the child to communicate more widely,
and take part in conversation and activities more
meaningfully. AAC also improves the child’s ability
to understand others, and to follow instructions

and routines. It does not inhibit the development
of speech.


**Multimodal communication**


- Multimodal communication (MMC) is a mode
of communication that simultaneously engages
in the use of several communication modes such

as speech, signs and gestures, pictures, symbols
and speech generating devices. MMC facilitates
functional communication development and the
understanding of words, instructions and events.


**Communication partner training**


- Communication partner training (CPT) is a
component of AAC intervention where people
the child sees often are taught strategies to
support and model AAC use. Typically this
means, parents, siblings and teachers


- CPT involves training the communication
partners to support the child in a range of
ways – by using AAC themselves, by helping
them use the AAC system and by creating
an environment where AAC is used freely.



18


The amount of intervention

needed will depend on
the goals and type of

intervention. We don’t

have enough evidence to
be sure how much therapy
is enough to achieve
communication goals. In

line with research on motor

disorders, we recommend

14 hours as a minimum

per goal. This is in addition
to the time spent trialling
speech generating devices
or other AAC systems.



**Outcomes from intervention**

**for communication**


Expressive language therapy results in
the child being able to use longer sentences,
more accurate grammar and a larger
vocabulary in verbal speech and/or with
AAC. Receptive language therapy results in
the child being able to better understand
instructions and more complex concepts,
which may impact positively on the child’s
ability to follow rules and routines.


AAC promotes speech and language
development. AAC allows the child to
take part in conversation and activities
more meaningfully. AAC also improves
the child’s ability to understand others,
and to follow instructions and routines.


Coaching parents or carers to be
communication partners promotes the
child’s communication skills by learning
to recognise when and how the child
communicates and how to respond to
these consistently and appropriately.
Communication partner training supports
the child’s successful use of AAC and

ensures the device will be used rather

than abandoned.


While problems with communication
are common, there are many ways
to support the development of a
child’s ability to communicate.


They include expressive and receptive
language therapy, speech therapy
and assistive technologies.


Communication partner training
can also be helpful.



19


## **Self-care skills**

All children with cerebral palsy will have some
level of difficulty managing their daily self-care
activities. Self-care skills include independence
with sleeping, toileting, bathing, moving
between positions, dressing, eating and drinking.
Understanding a child’s MACS and GMFCS levels
(see appendix) will help focus goal setting and
skill development for success with daily self
care activities.


Some children with cerebral palsy have difficulties
settling and getting to sleep, or wake in the night
or have breathing problems. Some are sleepy or overly
energetic during the day because they are over-tired.



In addition to GDT and CO-OP (described above),
the following specific interventions have also
been shown to improve goal achievement with
self-care skills. Sometimes intervention focuses

on the child’s independence and sometimes on
improving safety and efficiency for parents and
carers who may be supporting these activities.


**Assistive technology for self-care skills**


- Assistive technology includes equipment that
can help children to be more independent.
This can include a range of devices for bathing,
showering and changing, and a wet bed alarm.


**Assistive technology for changing positions**


- Some children need equipment for moving
between positions, such as for bathing and
toileting. This equipment could include
a hoist and sling, a transfer board, a lift
and home modifications.




**Sleep interventions**


- It is relatively common for children with cerebral
palsy to have sleep difficulties. The most common
sleep problems for children with cerebral palsy
include difficulties settling and getting to sleep,
waking up during the night, breathing problems,
and being sleepy or overly energetic during the
day because they are over-tired


- Sleep routines and behaviour interventions are the
first line of treatment for children with cerebral palsy.
This includes establishing consistent sleep routines


- A therapist might recommend a referral to
a specialised sleep clinic or service


- Medical interventions for sleep include melatonin
to reduce the time taken to fall asleep, analgesics
to help manage pain and breathing equipment
for obstructive sleep apnoea


- Selecting the right sleep intervention should be
considered as part of a multidisciplinary approach
including both therapy and medical teams. Further
research is needed to understand the effectiveness
of sleep interventions for children with cerebral palsy.


**Assistive technology for sleep**




- Various equipment options are available to support
sleep. Specific equipment can be trialled and
prescribed based upon each child’s individual needs.
The types of available equipment include height
adjustable beds, body position supports, a pressure
relieving mattress, night CPAP mask, bed pole and
grasp bar. More research is needed to understand
whether sleep systems improve sleep quality.


The amount of intervention needed to

support independence with self-care
outcomes will depend on the goals and
type of intervention. We don’t have enough
evidence to be sure how much therapy is
enough to achieve self-care goals. In line
with research on motor disorders, we

recommend 14 hours as a minimum

per goal.



**Outcomes from interventions**

**for self-care skills**


The ability to carry out self-care activities
independently is influenced by gross and
fine motor function, swallowing function,
vision and cognition. Classification systems
such as mini-MACS, MACS and GMFCS (see
appendix) are useful for understanding
a child’s potential to learn these skills.


Improvements in the ability to self-care
can mean less parental or carer assistance
is needed. Children can maintain the gains
made by using the new skills in everyday life.
Extra practice will be needed, however, to
improve on the goals or achieve new goals.


Some research supports the use of
wheelchairs and some sleep equipment
to improve independence and mobility,
improve sleep position and reduce the
load on caregivers. The use of pressure

care mattresses and cushions reduces

the likelihood of pressure sores.


Task-specific, motor training-based
early interventions are the gold

standard for children with cerebral

palsy, because they induce
neuroplasticity and produce
functional gains.


Sleep issues are common. If left
untreated, they can have a significant
impact on the child and their family.


Health professionals should work
closely with children and their families
to identify the most appropriate
option to help with sleep difficulties.



21


## **Learning**

Some children with cerebral palsy may experience difficulties with learning and thinking.
There can be difficulties with controlling or maintaining their attention, with memory,
with behaviours, with planning, or with being able to think of solutions to problems.


Other conditions associated with cerebral palsy, such as epilepsy, pain and poor sleep, can also
affect a child’s learning and thinking.



Early intervention might help the development of young children at high risk of learning difficulties.


A cognitive/neuropsychological assessment for any child with suspected learning difficulties
will help to identify specific strengths and weaknesses, provide an understanding of their
abilities relative to their peers, and provide an overall idea of intellectual abilities.


From this, interventions and strategies may be found that use the child’s strengths to compensate
for areas of difficulty. These strategies can often also be transferred to the classroom.


Keeping on top of issues like pain, poor sleep and epilepsy will help children best meet their
learning potential.



**Interactive reading and literacy programs**


- An interactive reading program involves
supporting parents or carers to select and
access children’s books and reading materials
appropriate for their child, and guiding them
in reading with their child


- Interactive reading is not just about learning
to read. It also helps with attention, memory,
pointing, thinking skills and language skills, as
well as promoting a rich parent-child relationship.
Groups such as ‘Reach Out and Read’ and ‘Let’s
Read’ provide good tips for how to engage
children in reading. For a tip sheet specifically
designed for children with cerebral palsy, see
www.readingrockets.org/article/readingtogether-tips-parents-children-cerebral-palsy


- A number of early literacy programs are available –
one example is MultiLit. This is an evidence-based
literacy program which focuses on phonological
awareness and oral language development for
pre-school and school-aged children. It can be

undertaken one-on-one or in the classroom. While

research shows that these are effective literacy
programs, there is little research specifically
around children with cerebral palsy, so it would
be best to speak to the program administrators
about the best format for your child.



**Cognitive play**


- Cognitive play supports parents to support
their child to develop their play skills


- It may involve providing toys and enriched
learning experiences that match the child’s
ability level, creating play spaces and
environments, providing equipment, using
prompts and expanding play sequences.


**Getting ready for school**


- Children who have not been in formal day
care or pre-school can benefit from transition
to school or school readiness programs


- They help children with skills like sitting
and listening in a group.


**Compensation strategies**


- General compensation strategies can
help maximise a child’s learning potential


- They include things like reducing background
noise while a child is trying to concentrate,
breaking complex questions or sentences
down so that there is only one thought or
one step per request, providing visual and
verbal prompts when necessary, and seating
a child near the front of a classroom.



22


**Medication**


- At times, medication can help children with
diagnosed attentional difficulties such as attention
deficit disorder. Medications need to be carefully
discussed and managed by the child’s treating
doctor (usually a paediatrician).


**Assistive technology for learning**




- Software and e-books are available to help with
reading and numeracy skills. These usually have
a range of access options such as switch, keyboard
and trackball. Literacy interventions tailored for
children with cerebral palsy using communication
devices can be effective in improving cognition.


The amount of intervention needed to support
pre-schoolers with their learning will depend
on the type of learning difficulties the child
has, the learning goals and the types of
educational or compensatory intervention.


As yet, there is not enough evidence to be
sure how much therapy is enough to achieve
learning goals.


For children to maximise their potential in
these areas daily exposure to books, reading
and literacy activities is recommended.



**Outcomes from interventions**

**for learning**


Approaches should focus on helping
the child to overcome or adapt to relative
weaknesses by using their strengths.


Preparing a child with the skills needed to
start formal education (e.g. sitting, listening,
maintaining attention and comprehension
etc) will support their transition to school.


In particular, giving the child additional
support in the area of literacy, so that
they can read and write, and encouraging
the development of skills such as
problem-solving and planning through
structured play, are important.


Assistive technology-based programs
can help enhance the academic
performance of children with cerebral
palsy. Their inclusion in daily settings
itself provides a favourable outcome.


Children with cerebral palsy may
experience difficulties with specific
areas of their thinking and problemsolving skills. Issues can include
difficulties controlling or maintaining
their attention, holding things in mind
momentarily, being able to control
inappropriate behaviours, or difficulties
in planning, organising or thinking
of solutions to problems.


Supports are available for assessing,
assisting and making adaptions

for a child’s needs, both at school

and at home.



23


## **Behaviour**



Some children with cerebral palsy experience difficulties
at times with their behaviour or emotional wellbeing.


There are a number of options.


**Behaviour therapy**


           - Positive behaviour support, behavioural interventions and positive parenting
are approaches that involve carers changing their interaction style with the
child, so as to promote positive relationships and behaviours in the child.


**Play therapy**


           - Play therapy is a powerful means of joining with the innate, creative, nonverbal capacities of children in order to engage and work therapeutically
with them. It is a developmentally appropriate, evidence-based method
of counselling younger children.


**Parenting programs**


           - Stepping Stones Triple P is a parenting program for parents of children with
disability aged 2 to 12. The Stepping Stones program is based on the Standard
Triple P program and provides families with the necessary skills and strategies
to address parenting concerns. It can reduce children’s problem behaviour
and emotional problems, and can improve parents’ confidence, wellbeing
and relationship with each other


          - The Mindful Parenting Program supports parents and carers to be present
at the given moment. This presence can take many forms: paying attention
to the child, awareness of own feelings when in conflict with the child, pausing
before responding, and listening to the child’s viewpoints, even if they differ
from a parent’s. Mindful parenting promotes secure attachments and
emotional wellbeing in children, parents and carers.


**Social stories**


           - Social stories are individualised, visually displayed stories that are developed
to help a child prepare for and understand social situations. Social stories have
been shown to improve behavioural outcomes and social relationships and skills.


**Assistive technology for behaviour**


           - Educational software addressing safety skills and social skills, such
as ‘Coping with Chaos’, are commercially available for children with
behavioural difficulties and/or learning difficulties.



24


**Outcomes from interventions**

**for behaviour**


Maintaining the wellbeing of the family
unit can help families stay together.
Building resilience and skills in children
and parents to cope with daily stressors
and adapt to developmental transitions
can lead to improved quality of life for
the child and parents.


Maintaining the wellbeing
of the family unit can help
families stay together.


Parenting programs can reduce
children’s problem behaviours and
emotional problems, and can improve
parent confidence, wellbeing and
relationships with each other.



The amount of intervention needed

to support pre-schoolers with their
behaviour will depend on the nature
of the behaviour of concern, the goals
and types of intervention used.


Both behaviour therapy and parenting
programs typically involve at least 6
to 12 sessions with a therapist, the
child and the parents and/or carers.



25


## **Social skills and friendships**

There are ways to help children better understand social situations and acquire skills that
will help their relationships with their family and friends. These approaches always include
parent/carer training and coaching to support the child’s use of new strategies.



A therapist will first conduct an assessment, which includes observing a child across a range of settings. After
this assessment, they will then recommend a therapy program that will help the child develop and practice
these strategies. They will also support and encourage the use of these skills in family and community settings


**Social stories**


                                      - Social stories are individualised, visually
displayed stories that are developed to help a
child prepare for social situations. Social stories
have been shown to improve behavioural
outcomes and social relationships and skills.


**Group-based early learning programs**


                                  - Early education groups and pre-schools
help children, especially those who have
not previously been to day care, develop
social skills such as turn-taking and sharing.


**Planned social activities**


                                  - Weekly library rhyme or singalong groups
where other children are present give the
child the opportunity to interact with children
and watch other children interact together.
This supports social skill development.


**Assistive technology for social**
**skills and friendships**


                                   - Educational software addressing safety
skills and social skills, such as ‘Coping
with Chaos’, are commercially available
for children with behavioural difficulties
and/or learning difficulties.




The amount of intervention

needed to support pre
schoolers with their social skills

will depend on the goals and
types of intervention used.
Pre-schoolers are encouraged
to have regular, weekly contact
with other children to support
their social development.



**Outcomes from interventions**

**for social skills and friendships**


Social stories have been

shown to improve behavioural

outcomes and social skills


Pre-schoolers are encouraged
to have regular, weekly contact
with other children to support
their social development.


Supporting the development of
social skills involves understanding
the developmental level of the child
and their current patterns of

social interactions.


A program can then be
developed to teach the child to

better understand social situations

and acquire new skills.



27


## **Support for parents and carers**

Caring for children with cerebral palsy comes with extra responsibilities. Parents
of children with cerebral palsy report feeling higher levels of stress, anxiety
and depression than parents who do not have a child with a long-term health
condition. Parental stress is often highest among those whose children have
a communication or intellectual disability, or who experience pain.


We recommend customised emotional and social support for parents. Recommended
interventions can include the following:


           - Stepping Stones Triple P Parenting program (SSTP) can increase parents’ confidence,
wellbeing and relationship with each other


          - Acceptance and Commitment therapy (ACT) is a cognitive behavioural therapy program
that incorporates mindfulness, experiential acceptance and engagement in deliberate
actions to improve psychological flexibility. Parenting ACT (PACT) aims to boost parents’
ability to use parenting strategies in complex situations


          - SSTP + ACT combined is more effective in reducing parental psychological symptoms

than SSTP alone


           - Solution-focused brief therapy is future-focused, goal-directed and focuses on
realistic solutions. This is a flexible intervention offered across multiple contexts


           - Respite provides families with a short break from the extra responsibilities associated
with caring for a person with cerebral palsy


           - Assistive technology lightens caregiver assistance needed in the areas of mobility,
self-care and to a lesser extent social function. Receiving information and training
from early intervention providers and information from other sources such as libraries,
workshops and other parents will provide parents feeling more confident and
competent using the assistive technology.


Parents should be offered counselling at various important family transition times,
such as when a child is starting school. Most parents will benefit from the opportunity
to discuss their concerns, fears, emotions and the impact of having a child with cerebral
palsy on the whole family. Others will benefit from the opportunity to connect with other
parents in similar circumstances through mutual support groups or online forums.


A proportion of parents may need referral for psychological interventions for depression
or anxiety conditions. All families need to be provided with information about how to
access services and supports for their child.


There is insufficient evidence to recommend specifically how much support is needed,
as family situations vary considerably.



28


**Outcomes from parent support**


Parents of children with cerebral palsy
find counselling and social support at
family transition times helps to manage
overwhelming feelings such as stress,
anxiety or depression and to cope with
the stress of extra caring responsibilities.



29


## **Classification systems**

Researchers and therapists use a number of classification systems
to help understand the ways in which children with cerebral palsy
are affected, and what may help. You may hear these terms used.


**Gross Motor Function Classification System**


The Gross Motor Function Classification System (GMFCS) is a scale used
to broadly classify the severity of mobility in children with cerebral palsy.
The GMFCS level is helpful to guide the focus of gross motor skill training
for children. The child who is:


**• GMFCS Level I:** Children walk at home, school, outdoors and in the
community. They can climb stairs without the use of a railing. Children
perform gross motor skills such as running and jumping, but speed, balance
and coordination are limited. (Children who are GMFCS 1 walk by 2 years.)


**• GMFCS Level II:** Children walk in most settings and climb stairs holding
onto a railing. They may experience difficulty walking long distances
and balancing on uneven terrain, inclines, in crowded areas or confined
spaces. Children may walk with physical assistance, a handheld mobility
device or used wheeled mobility over long distances. Children have only
minimal ability to perform gross motor skills such as running and jumping.
(These children might transition from a walking device to independent
walking, or start to walk between 3 and 6 years.)


**• GMFCS Level III:** Children walk using a hand-held mobility device in
most indoor settings. They may climb stairs holding onto a railing with
supervision or assistance. Children use wheeled mobility when traveling
long distances and may self-propel for shorter distances. (Children at this
level may transition to new mobility devices and become more competent
and independent with their device in a range of environments between
3-6 years.)


**• GMFCS Level IV:** Children use methods of mobility that require physical
assistance or powered mobility in most settings. They may walk for
short distances at home with physical assistance or use powered mobility
or a body support walker when positioned. At school, outdoors and in
the community children are transported in a manual wheelchair or use
powered mobility. (Children at this GMFCS level may become independent
in powered mobility and be using a walking device to improve participation
and maintain strength and fitness.)


- **GMFCS Level V:** Children are transported in a manual wheelchair in
all settings. Children are limited in their ability to maintain antigravity
head and trunk postures and control leg and arm movements. (Children
at GMFCS V are prescribed wheelchairs specifically modified for their
needs in all environments.)



**Manual Ability**

**Classification Scale**


The Manual Ability Classification
Scale (MACS) and mini-MACS
level is helpful to guide the focus
of goals relating to hand function
training for children. The child

who is:


**• MACS I** handles objects
easily and successfully


**• MACS II** handles most

objects, but with some reduced
quality and/or speed


**• MACS III** handles objects with
difficulty, and needs help to
prepare and/or modify activities


**• MACS IV** handles a limited

selection of easily managed
objects and always requires
help from others


**• MACS V** isn’t able to handle

objects and isn’t able to complete
simple actions with hands.



30


**Eating and Drinking**

**Classification Scale**


The Eating and Drinking
Classification Scale (EDACS)
describes the functional eating
and drinking skills of children
with cerebral palsy. This scale is
helpful to guide the focus of goals
relating to swallowing, eating
and drinking. The child who is:


**• EDACS I** eats and drinks

safely and efficiently


**• EDACS II** eats and drinks

safely but with some
limitations to efficiency


**• EDACS III** eats and drinks with

some limitations to safety;
maybe limitations to efficiency


**• EDACS IV** eats and drinks with

significant limitations to safety


**• EDACS V** is unable to eat or drink

safely – tube feeding may be
considered to provide nutrition.



**Communication Function**

**Classification System**


The Communication Function

Classification System (CFCS)
broadly describes the different
communication levels for people
with cerebral palsy. It takes
into consideration all modes of

communication, not just verbal
speech. This system is helpful
to guide the focus of goals
relating to communication.

The child who is:


**• CFCS level I** independently and
effectively alternates between
being a sender and receiver of
information with most people

in most environments


**• CFCS level II** independently
alternates between being a

sender and receiver with most

people in most environments,
but the conversation may

be slower


**• CFCS level III** usually
communicates effectively
with familiar communication

partners, but not unfamiliar

partners, in most environments


**• CFCS level IV** is not always

consistent at communicating
with familiar communication

partners


**• CFCS level V** is seldom able

to communicate effectively,
even with familiar people.



**Viking Speech Scale**


The Viking Speech Scale helps to
classify the speech performance
in children with cerebral palsy
aged over 4. The child who is:


**• Viking level I** has speech
that is not affected by

motor disorder


**• Viking level II** has speech
that is imprecise, but is
usually understandable
to unfamiliar listeners


**• Viking level III** has speech
that is unclear and not usually
understandable to unfamiliar

listeners out of context


**• Viking level IV** has no
understandable speech.



31


## **References**

**Task-specific training**


Novak, I. (2014). Evidence-based diagnosis, health care and rehabilitation for children
with cerebral palsy. _Journal of Child Neurology_, 29(8): 1141-56.


Novak, I., Hines, M., Goldsmith, S., & Barclay, R. (2012). Clinical prognostic messages
from a systematic review on cerebral palsy. _Pediatrics_, 130(5), e1285-e1312.


**Gross motor skills such as walking and mobility**


Novak, I., Morgan, C., Fahey, M., Finch-Edmondson, M., Galea, C., Hines, A., ... & Shore, B. (2020).
State of the evidence traffic lights 2019: Systematic review of interventions for preventing and
treating children with cerebral palsy. _Current neurology and neuroscience reports_, 20(2), 1-21.


C., & Taylor, N. (2010). _Physiotherapy and occupational therapy for people with cerebral palsy:_
_A problem-based approach to assessment and management._ London: MacKeith Press.


Law, M., & Darrah, J. (2014). Emerging therapy approaches: An emphasis on function.
_Journal of Child Neurology_, 29(8), 1101-1107.


Novak, I., Cusick, A. & Lannin, N. (2009). Occupational therapy home programs for cerebral
palsy: Double-blind, randomized, controlled trial. _Pediatrics_, 124(4), e606-14.


Law, M., Darrah, J., Pollock, N., Wilson, B., Russell, D., Walter, S., Rosenbaum, P., & Galuppi, B. (2011).
Focus on function: A cluster, randomised controlled trial comparing child versus context-focused
intervention for young children with cerebral palsy. _Developmental Medicine and Child Neurology_, 9, 1-9.


Lowing, K., Bexelius, A., & Brogen Carlberg, E. (2009). Activity focused and goal directed therapy
for children with cerebral palsy – Do goals make a difference? _Disability & Rehabilitation_,

31(22), 1808-1816.


Ketelaar, M., Vermeer, A., Hart, H., Beek, E., & Helders, P. (2001). Effects of a functional therapy
program on motor abilities of children with cerebral palsy. _Physical Therapy_, 81(9), 1534-1545.


Lowing, K., Bexelius, A., & Brogen Carlberg, E. (2010). Goal-directed functional therapy: A longitudinal
study on gross motor function in children with cerebral palsy. _Disability & Rehabilitation_, 32(11), 908-916.


Ekstrom, L., Johansson, E., Granat, T., & Brogen Carlberg, E. (2005). Functional therapy for children
with cerebral palsy: An ecological approach. _Developmental Medicine and Child Neurology_, 47(9), 613–619.


Sorsdahl, A., Moe-Nilssen, R., Kaale, H., Rieber, J., & Strand, L. (2010). Change in basic motor abilities,
quality of movement and everyday activities following intensive, goal directed, activity focused
physiotherapy in a group setting for children with cerebral palsy. _BMC Paediatrics_, 10(26).


James, D., Pfaff, J., & Jeffries, LM. Modified ride-on cars as early mobility for children with mobility
limitations: a scoping review. _Physical & Occupational Therapy in Pediatrics_, 2019;39(5):525-42.


Digiacomo, F., Tamburin, S., Tebaldi, S., Pezzani, M., Tagliafierro, M., Casale, R., et al. Improvement
of motor performance in children with cerebral palsy treated with exoskeleton robotic training:
A retrospective explorative analysis. _Restorative Neurology and Neuroscience_, 2019;37(3):239-44.


Jackman, M., Lannin, N., Galea, C., Sakzewski, L., Miller, L., & Novak, I. (2020). What is the threshold

dose of upper limb training for children with cerebral palsy to improve function? A systematic
review. _Australian Occupational Therapy Journal_, 67(3), 269-280.



32


**Hips and musculoskeletal development**


Australasian Academy of Cerebral Palsy and Developmental Medicine. (2014). Australian Hip Surveillance
Guidelines. https://www.ausacpdm.org.au/resources/australian-hip-surveillance-guidelines/


Hägglund, G., Alriksson-Schmidt, A., Lauge-Pedersen, H. et al. (2014). Prevention of dislocation
of the hip in children with cerebral palsy. _The Bone & Joint Journal_, 96-B(11):1546-52.


Hägglund, G., Andersson, S., Duppe, H. et al. (2005). Prevention of severe contractures might
replace multilevel surgery in cerebral palsy: Results of a population-based health care programme
and new techniques to reduce spasticity. _Journal of Pediatric Orthopeadics_, 14(4), 269-273.


Novak, I., Morgan, C., Fahey, M., Finch-Edmondson, M., Galea, C., Hines, A., ... & Shore, B. (2020).
State of the evidence traffic lights 2019: Systematic review of interventions for preventing and
treating children with cerebral palsy. _Current Neurology and Neuroscience Reports_, 20(2), 1-21.


Wynter, M., Gibson, N., Kentish, M. et al. (2011). The consensus statement on hip surveillance for
children with cerebral palsy: Australian standards of care. _J Pediatr Rehab Medicine_, 4(3):183-95.


Wynter, M., Gibson, N., Willoughby, KL. et al. (2015). Australian hip surveillance guidelines for
children with cerebral palsy: five year review. _Dev Med Child Neurol_, 57:808-820.


**Management of muscle tone and spasticity**


Buizer, AI., Martens, BHM., Grandbois van Ravenhorst, C., Schoonmade, LJ., Becher, JG., &

Vermeulen, RJ. Effect of continuous intrathecal baclofen therapy in children: a systematic
review. _Developmental Medicine & Child Neurology_, 2019;61(2):128-34.


Novak, I., Morgan, C., Fahey, M., Finch-Edmondson, M., Galea, C., Hines, A., ... & Shore, B. (2020).
State of the evidence traffic lights 2019: Systematic review of interventions for preventing and
treating children with cerebral palsy. _Current Neurology and Neuroscience Reports_, 20(2), 1-21.


Pron, G. Lumbosacral dorsal rhizotomy for spastic cerebral palsy: A health technology
assessment. _Ontario Health Technology Assessment Series_, 2017;17(10):1-186.


**Hand function and fine motor skills**


Novak, I., Morgan, C., Fahey, M., Finch-Edmondson, M., Galea, C., Hines, A., ... & Shore, B. (2020).
State of the evidence traffic lights 2019: Systematic review of interventions for preventing and
treating children with cerebral palsy. _Current Neurology and Neuroscience Reports_, 20(2), 1-21.


Jackman, M., Lannin, N., Galea, C., Sakzewski, L., Miller, L. & Novak, I. (2020). What is the threshold

dose of upper limb training for children with cerebral palsy to improve function? A systematic review.
_Australian Occupational Therapy Journal_, 67 (3) 1440-1630.12666 269-280.


Novak, I. & Berry, J. (2014b). Home program intervention effectiveness evidence. _Physical &_
_Occupational Therapy in Pediatrics_, 34 (4), 384– 389.


Dodd, K., Imms, C., & Taylor, N. (2010). _Physiotherapy and occupational therapy for people with_
_cerebral palsy: A problem-based approach to assessment and management._ London: MacKeith Press.


Law, M., & Darrah, J. (2014). Emerging therapy approaches: An emphasis on function. _Journal_
_of Child Neurology_, 29(8), 1101-1107.


Novak, I., Cusick, A. & Lannin, N. (2009) Occupational therapy home programs for cerebral palsy:

Double-blind, randomized, controlled trial. _Pediatrics_, 124(4), e606-14.


Law, M., Darrah, J., Pollock, N., Wilson, B., Russell, D., Walter, S., Rosenbaum, P., & Galuppi, B. (2011).
Focus on function: A cluster, randomised controlled trial comparing child versus context-focused
intervention for young children with cerebral palsy. _Developmental Medicine and Child Neurology_, 9, 1-9.


Bourke-Taylor, H., Cotter, C., & Stephan, R. Young children with cerebral palsy: families self-reported
equipment needs and out-of-pocket expenditure. _Child: Care, Health and Development_, 2014;40(5):654-62.


Hsieh, H-C., Lin, H-Y., Chiu, W-H., Meng, LF., & Liu, CK. Upper-limb rehabilitation with adaptive video
games for preschool children with developmental disabilities. _The American Journal of Occupational_
_Therapy: Official Publication of the American Occupational Therapy Association_, 2015;69(4):6904290020p1-5.



33


**Swallowing, eating and drinking**


Benfer, KA., Weir, KA., Bell, KL., Ware, RS., Davies, PSW., & Boyd, RN. (2017). The Eating and Drinking Ability Classification System
in a population�based sample of preschool children with cerebral palsy. _Developmental Medicine & Child Neurology_, 59(6):647-54.


Tschirren, L., Bauer, S., Hanser, C., Marsico, P., Sellers, D., & van Hedel, H. J. (2018). The Eating and Drinking Ability Classification
System: concurrent validity and reliability in children with cerebral palsy. _Developmental Medicine & Child Neurology_, 60(6), 611-617.


Novak, I., Morgan, C., Fahey, M., Finch-Edmondson, M., Galea, C., Hines, A., ... & Shore, B. (2020). State of the evidence traffic
lights 2019: Systematic review of interventions for preventing and treating children with cerebral palsy. _Current Neurology_
_and Neuroscience Reports_, 20(2), 1-21.


Angsupaisal, M., Maathuis, C.G. & Hadders�Algra, M. 2015. Adaptive seating systems in children with severe cerebral
palsy across International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health for Children and Youth version domains:
A systematic review. _Developmental Medicine & Child Neurology_, 57(10), pp.919-930.


**Communication**


Hidecker, M. J. C., Paneth, N., Rosenbaum, P. L., Kent, R. D., Lillie, J., Eulenberg, J. B., ... & Taylor, K. (2011). Developing and
validating the Communication Function Classification System for individuals with cerebral palsy. _Developmental Medicine_
_& Child Neurology_, 53(8), 704-710.


Pennington, L., Virella, D., Mjøen, T., da Graça Andrada, M., Murray, J., Colver, A., ... & Andersen, G. (2013). Development of The
Viking Speech Scale to classify the speech of children with cerebral palsy. _Research in Developmental Disabilities_, 34(10), 3202-3210.


Paulson, A., & Vargus-Adams, J. (2017). Overview of four functional classification systems commonly used in cerebral palsy.

_Children_, 4(4), 30.


Norberg, A., Miniscalco, C., Lohmander, A, & Himmelmann, K. (2012). Speech problems affect more than one in two
children with cerebral palsy: Swedish population-based study. _Acta Paediatrica_, 102, 161-166.


Clarke, M., Price, K. & Griffiths, T. (2016). Augmentative and alternative communication for children with cerebral palsy.

_Paediatrics and child health_, 22(9), 367-371.


Millar, DC., Light, JC., & Schlosser, RW. (2006). The impact of augmentative and alternative communication intervention
on the speech production of individuals with developmental disabilities: A research review. _Journal of Speech, Language,_
_and Hearing Research_, 1(4).


Granlund, M., Bjorck-Akersson, E., Wilder, J. & Ylven, R. (2009). AAC interventions for children in a family environment:
Implementing evidence in practise. _Augmentative and Alternative Communication_ . 24(3), 207-219.


Interaction training for conversation partners for children with cerebral palsy: A systematic review. (2004). _International_
_Journal of Language & Communication Disorders_, 39(2).


**Self-care skills**


Novak, I., Morgan, C., Fahey, M., Finch-Edmondson, M., Galea, C., Hines, A., ... & Shore, B. (2020). State of the evidence
traffic lights 2019: Systematic review of interventions for preventing and treating children with cerebral palsy. _Current_
_Neurology and Neuroscience Reports_, 20(2), 1-21.


Dodd, K., Imms, C., & Taylor, N. (2010). _Physiotherapy and occupational therapy for people with cerebral palsy: A problem-based_
_approach to assessment and management._ London: MacKeith Press.


Law, M., & Darrah, J. (2014). Emerging therapy approaches: An emphasis on function. _Journal of Child Neurology_, 29(8), 1101-1107.


Novak, I., Cusick, A. & Lannin, N. (2009). Occupational therapy home programs for cerebral palsy: Double-blind, randomized,

controlled trial. _Pediatrics_, 124(4), e606-14.


Law, M., Darrah, J., Pollock, N., Wilson, B., Russell, D., Walter, S., Rosenbaum, P., & Galuppi, B. (2011). Focus on function:
A cluster, randomised controlled trial comparing child versus context-focused intervention for young children with
cerebral palsy. _Developmental Medicine and Child Neurology_, 9, 1-9.


Appleton, R.E., Jone, A.P., Gamble, C., Williamson, P.R., Wiggs, L., Montgomery, P.,Sutcliffe, A., Barker, C., & Gringras, P.
(2012). The use of melatonin in children with neurodevelopmental disorders and impaired sleep: A randomised, doubleblind, placebo-controlled parallel study (MENDS). _NIHR Health Technology Assessment_, 16 (40), 1-239.


Østensjø, S., Carlberg, EB., & Vøllestad, NK. The use and impact of assistive devices and other environmental modifications
on everyday activities and care in young children with cerebral palsy. _Disability and Rehabilitation_ . 2005 Jul 1;27(14):849-61.


Bourke-Taylor, H., Cotter, C., & Stephan, R. Young children with cerebral palsy: families self-reported equipment needs
and out-of-pocket expenditure. _Child: Care, Health and Development_ . 2014;40(5):654-62.



34


**Learning**


Buckingham, J., Wheldall, K., & Beaman, R. A randomised control trial of a Tier-2 small-group intervention
(‘MiniLit’) for young struggling readers. _Australian Journal of Learning Difficulties_, 2012;17(2):79-99.


Novak, .I, Hines, M., Goldsmith, S., & Barclay, R. (2012). Clinical prognostic messages from a systematic
review on cerebral palsy. _Pediatrics_, 130(5):e1285-312.


Novak, I., Morgan, C., Fahey, M., Finch-Edmondson, M., Galea, C., Hines, A., ... & Shore, B. (2020).
State of the evidence traffic lights 2019: Systematic review of interventions for preventing and
treating children with cerebral palsy. _Current Neurology and Neuroscience Reports_, 20(2), 1-21.


Reading Rockets. https://www.readingrockets.org/article/reading-together-tips-parentschildren-cerebral-palsy. Accessed July 2020


Perilli, V., Stasolla, F., & Laporta, D. Enhancing Academic Performance of Children with Cerebral
Palsy through Technological Aids: A Mini Review. _Arch Neurol & Neurosci_, 2019;2(3).


Spittle, A., Orton, J., Anderson, P. J., Boyd, R., & Doyle, L. W. (2015). Early developmental intervention
programmes provided post hospital discharge to prevent motor and cognitive impairment in
preterm infants. _Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews_, (11).


**Behaviour**


Novak, I., Morgan, C., Fahey, M., Finch-Edmondson, M., Galea, C., Hines, A., ... & Shore, B. (2020).
State of the evidence traffic lights 2019: Systematic review of interventions for preventing and
treating children with cerebral palsy. _Current Neurology and Neuroscience Reports_, 20(2), 1-21.


**Social skills and friendships**


Novak, I., Morgan, C., Fahey, M., Finch-Edmondson, M., Galea, C., Hines, A., ... & Shore, B. (2020).
State of the evidence traffic lights 2019: Systematic review of interventions for preventing and
treating children with cerebral palsy. _Current Neurology and Neuroscience Reports_, 20(2), 1-21.


**Support for parents and carers**


Higginson, J. & Matthewson, M. (2014). Working therapeutically with parents after the diagnosis of
a child’s cerebral palsy: Issues and practice. _Australian Journal of Rehabilitation Counselling_, 1(20), 50-66.


Novak, I., Morgan, C., Fahey, M., Finch-Edmondson, M., Galea, C., Hines, A., ... & Shore, B. (2020).
State of the evidence traffic lights 2019: Systematic review of interventions for preventing and
treating children with cerebral palsy. _Current Neurology and Neuroscience Reports_, 20(2), 1-21.


Schuengel, C., Rentinck, I., Stolk, J. et al. (2009). Parents’ reactions to the diagnosis of cerebral
palsy: associations between resolution, age and severity of disability. _Child Care Health Dev_,
35(5):673-80. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2214.2009.00951.x.


Cheshire, A., Barlow, J. H., & Powell, L. A. (2010). The psychosocial well-being of parents of
children with cerebral palsy: a comparison study. _Disability and Rehabilitation_, 32(20), 1673-1677.


Parkes, J., Caravale, B., Marcelli, M., Franco, F., & Colver, A. (2011). Parenting stress and children with
cerebral palsy: a European cross�sectional survey. _Developmental Medicine & Child Neurology_, 53(9), 815-821.


Whittingham, K., Sanders, M. R., McKinlay, L., & Boyd, R. N. (2016). Parenting intervention combined
with acceptance and commitment therapy: a trial with families of children with cerebral palsy.
_Journal of Pediatric Psychology_, 41(5), 531-542.


Whittingham, K., Wee, D., & Boyd, R. (2011). Systematic review of the efficacy of parenting
interventions for children with cerebral palsy. _Child: Care, Health and Development_, 37(4), 475-483.



35


## **Notes**



36


37


#### **For more information,** **please get in touch:**

##### Call us on 1300 888 378 Email us at **ask@cerebralpalsy.org.au** Visit cerebralpalsy.org.au


