Hope, J. M., & Field-Fote, E. C. (2023). Assessment of Dorsiflexion Ability across Tasks in Persons with Subacute SCI after Combined Locomotor Training and Transcutaneous Spinal Stimulation. Bioengineering (Basel, Switzerland), 10(5), 528. https://doi.org/10.3390/bioengineering10050528 

Transcutaneous spinal stimulation activates the dorsal root fibers carrying afferent
information, which influences both volitional and reflex motor output. In the development of TSS interventions to improve functional outcomes, it is important to understand how it influences both voluntary and involuntary muscle activation and how it may contribute to the ability to achieve adequate dorsiflexion.
The study investigates whether LT combined with TSS is associated with a persistent effect on dorsiflexion during walking and dorsiflexor AROM in persons with subacute motor in complete SCI beyond that observed with LT alone.
The study also assesses the relationship between plantar flexor spasticity and the ability to dorsiflex across the different tasks (walking and volitional control).

Participants were 16–65 years of age, 2–6 months since the time of spinal cord injury, qualify for participation in a clinical LT program as determined by their physical therapist, and able to walk 10 m without the use of an ankle–foot orthosis.
[FROM TABLE 1]:  10 participants (9 male, 1 female), associated levels of SCI include C1, C2, C3, C4, C5, and C7. 

LT: Ranged from treadmill-based training (with or without body weight support and with or without manual or robotic assistance) to overground LT (with or without body weight support and with or without manual assistance)
TSS: Stimulating electrode (5 cm round electrode) was placed over vertebral levels T11/T12 (identified via manual palpation). Reference electrode (10 cm-15 cm butterfly electrode) was placed over the umbilicus. Symmetrical, biphasic stimulation with 300 second pulse width was delivered at 50 Hz. Stimulation intensity had a range of 32–100 mA. Stimulation time was standardized to 30 min in duration and was delivered at the target stimulation intensity concomitantly with LT. 
Group 1: LT + TSS (four participants)
Group 2: LT + TSSSham (six participants)
Wash-in phase: All participants received LT 3 days per week. 
Intervention phase: Group 1 received LT augmented by TSS 3 days per week. Group 2 received LT combined with sham TSS 3 days per week.

Dorsiflexion during walking: measures the increase in peak ankle angle during the swing phase. Inertial measurement unit sensors were strapped bilaterally to lower extremities (attached to the pelvis at the center of the back at the height of the anterior superior iliac spine and bilaterally to the middle of the lateral thighs, tibias, and dorsum of the feet inside shoelaces) according to manufacturer guidelines to capture ankle joint angles using inertial motion capture software (XSENS). Calibrated angles were verified during standing with the hip and knee in full extension, and the ankle in the neutral prior to starting the test. Participants walked overground along a 10 m walkway following the instruction to walk as quickly and safely as possible. This test was performed 3 times with a 2 min rest interval between trials. For each walk, the middle 50 percent of steps for the tested foot was analyzed to remove any impact of acceleration and deceleration. Peak sagittal ankle angles at mid-swing were extracted from the sensor data, where positive angles indicated dorsiflexion and negative angles indicated plantarflexion. Based on previous data from treadmill walking in persons with stroke, the minimal detectable change for peak ankle angle during swing phase is 4.9 degrees; this was used as a benchmark in the current study

Dorsiflexor activation task: measures an increase in AROM. Participants were positioned reclined on an adjustable height mat table with both legs extended and shoes removed. Sensor placement was as described above for walking but with shoes off (XSENS). EMG recording electrodes were placed over the muscle belly of the tibialis anterior midway between the knee and ankle joint. EMG data signals were captured at a 1000 Hz sampling rate using commercial software (Spike CED). Participants were instructed to pull their toes up toward their head as hard and fast as they could at the onset of a 5 s auditory tone and to maintain that contraction until the tone stopped. This test was performed 3 times with a 30 s rest interval between trials. If background EMG indicated the tibialis anterior muscle was not at rest before or after the tone, or if the dorsiflexion movement elicited ankle clonus, then that trial was discarded, and the test was repeated. EMG data related to the time between the start and end of the auditory tone were processed offline using customized, commercial software (Spike CED) with a root mean square (RMS) filter of 8 ms. 

Ankle clonus drop test: measures the rise in the number of clonus oscillations during 10s. Briefly, participants sat upright with back support on the edge of a mat table, with shoes removed and socks left on with inertial measurement sensor (XSENS) placements as described above. The ball of one foot was positioned on the edge of a platform (10 cm height). The mat height was adjusted to ensure that the hip, knee, and ankle joints were at 90-degree angles. The participant’s leg was lifted from beneath the knee until it contacted a T-bar positioned 10 cm above the resting position of the knee. The examiner quickly released the leg allowing the forefoot to impact the edge of the platform. Responses in each ankle were tested 3 times. The number of clonus oscillations during 10 s in each trial was counted offline, and the average number of oscillations for the 3 trials of each test session was used for analysis.

Effect size was computed using Cohen’s d, and Spearman’s rank correlations were used to assess associations between measures. To assess the overall effect of 4 weeks of LT on the measures of interest, data were pooled across phases and groups and analyzed using Wilcoxon signed rank tests. 

The current study does not provide evidence of a persistent effect of combined TSS and LT on volitional dorsiflexion or dorsiflexion during the swing phase of walking, as there were no differences between the group received TSS and the group that did not receive it. However, after 4 weeks of locomotor training, improvements were observed in all outcome measures (dorsiflexion during walking, dorsiflexor activation task, ankle clonus drop test)

Factors other than enhanced dorsiflexor activation are likely responsible for improved walking outcomes associated with TSS. 
It seems likely that the increase in walking outcomes exhibited in prior studies may be due to changes in other joints important for foot clearance during walking. There is still a possibility of a phase-dependent association between increased hip and knee flexion with decreased ankle dorsiflexion during the swing phase in people with SCI that should be examined in future studies.
There has been recent evidence that corticospinal tract descending drive during a complex ankle control task is associated with walking outcomes. Additionally, although dorsiflexors do not require conscious input during walking, there is evidence that descending supraspinal drive influences walking. Therefore, perhaps the degree of corticospinal tract descending drive to the dorsiflexors is what is driving the strong relationship we observed in our study.
Although on average the degree change was small, even a small increase in dorsiflexion during the swing phase can enable toe clearance and decrease fall risk. Therefore, there is a need to determine the minimal clinically important change for dorsiflexor activation during walking.
Theoretically, increased ability to activate the tibialis anterior activity would be associated with increased reciprocal inhibition to the plantar flexors and therefore decreased reflex activation of the soleus. However, in some persons with SCI, the remodeling of spinal circuits results in a reversal of reciprocal inhibition to reciprocal facilitation. Therefore, our results may be due to this phenomenon.
While we selected 50 Hz TSS because prior work suggests it both improves motor output and decreases spasticity, more recent evidence from studies using 30 Hz stimulation suggests this lower frequency may also be effective at influencing our outcomes of interest. Perhaps the effects of TSS in our study may have been more beneficial if 30 Hz was utilized, as this has been shown to have neuromodulatory effects on voluntary locomotor activity

