nature biomedical engineering
Perspective

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41551-025-01445-1

Peripheral neural interfaces for reading
high-frequency brain signals
Received: 22 September 2023
Accepted: 29 May 2025
Published online: xx xx xxxx
Check for updates

Jaime Ibáñez 1,2,3 , Blanka Zicher4, Etienne Burdet
Carsten Mehring 6,7 & Dario Farina 4

, Stuart N. Baker5,

4

Accurate and robust recording and decoding from the central nervous
system (CNS) is essential for advances in human–machine interfacing.
Technologies for direct measurements of CNS activity are limited by their
resolution, sensitivity to interference and invasiveness. Motor neurons
(MNs) represent the motor output layer of the CNS, receiving and sampling
signals from different regions in the nervous system and generating the
neural commands that control muscles. Muscle recordings and deep
learning decode the spiking activity of spinal MNs in real time and with
high accuracy. The input signals to MNs can be estimated from MN outputs.
Here we argue that peripheral neural interfaces using muscle sensors
represent a promising, non-invasive approach to estimate some of the
neural activity from the CNS that reaches the MNs but does not directly
modulate force production. We discuss the evidence supporting this
concept and the advances needed to consolidate and test MN-based CNS
interfaces in controlled and real-world settings.

Neural signals from the central nervous system (CNS) reach the muscles and control when and how they generate forces to produce movement. The motor unit is the key structure in the translation of neural
information into muscle contraction. A motor unit consists of a spinal
motor neuron (MN) and the group of muscle fibres that it innervates
and controls1. Motor units represent the frontier between neural processing and behaviour, and MNs are the last common neural pathway
controlling behaviour2. The activation of each MN in the spinal cord
is mirrored by the activation of the innervated muscle unit, thus the
muscle unit can serve as an accessible proxy of neural activity. From an
engineering perspective, reading the activity of MNs provides access
to the output of the somatic motor nervous system (Fig. 1a) and a way
to infer its working principles.
Currently, methods for directly—that is, invasively—recording
representative ongoing activity from the CNS are scarce. However,
there is growing evidence of increasingly safe approaches, such as
intracranial recordings used in various medical devices, which have

led to meaningful advancements in fields such as speech prostheses
and other types of brain–machine interface for patients with severe
paralysis3,4. Nonetheless, exploring alternative methods for recording
CNS activity remains crucial to address existing limitations in current
technologies and to further enhance safety and efficacy in neurotechnologies5. As a potential alternative to direct brain recordings, we can
use an inverse modelling approach to investigate signals in the CNS
by decoding the final electrical activity produced at its outputs, in the
periphery of the nervous system.
Advances in sensors and signal processing methods, including
deep learning methods, have enabled access to the neural activity
of sets of MNs by recording the activity they evoke in muscles using
electromyography (EMG)6. EMG recordings represent a mixture of
the electrical activity from the muscle units that compose a muscle,
which serve as proxies for the MNs in the spinal cord. EMG signals are
therefore recordings that embed the final output of the CNS. Identifying motor unit activity in the EMG signals then yields a neural interface.

BSICoS Group, Departamento de Ingeniería Electrónica y Comunicaciones, Instituto de Investigación en Ingeniería de Aragón (I3A), Universidad de
Zaragoza, Zaragoza, Spain. 2BSICoS Group, Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria (IIS) Aragón, Zaragoza, Spain. 3Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red
de Bioingeniería, Biomateriales y Nanomedicina (CIBER-BBN), Zaragoza, Spain. 4Department of Bioengineering, Imperial College, London, UK. 5Institute
of Neuroscience, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK. 6Bernstein Center Freiburg, University of Freiburg, Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany.
7
BrainLinks-BrainTools, University of Freiburg, Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany.
e-mail: jibanez@unizar.es; d.farina@imperial.ac.uk

1

Nature Biomedical Engineering

Perspective

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41551-025-01445-1

a

b

Reading
point
Brain and spinal cord

Muscle units
MNs

Spinal and supraspinal
inputs (corticospinal,
reticulospinal, propriospinal
and other drives)

Afferent inputs
from muscles and
recurrent connections
(Renshaw cells)

Afferent feedback

Fig. 1 | Convergent inputs to MNs. a, MNs in the muscles represent the output
layer of the CNS. By measuring the electrical activity that muscles produce
during contraction, we can characterize the firing patterns of MNs and therefore
read the neural activity of this last layer of the nervous system complex network.

b, MNs receive inputs from multiple sites in the CNS (including direct brain
projections) and from sensory organs in the periphery. All this information drives
MN activity7.

This concept is schematically described in Fig. 1a. In this scheme, the
CNS and peripheral nervous system constitute a large neural network
with high complexity. This network projects its activity to MNs, which
form the last layer of the network and connect with different parts of
the CNS7 (Fig. 1b).
By characterizing the MN activity that reaches muscles, we can
access some of the neural signals most tightly associated with behaviour. This has been a key reason for the use of myocontrol for interfaces
in clinical applications, such as using EMG to estimate motion intent
and to control active prosthetics8. However, it is unclear whether the
motor command to the muscles (that is, the neural inputs to muscles
that determine or modulate the level of contraction) is the only information that MNs encode, or whether the MNs also encode activity in
the CNS that does not directly modulate muscle force. This question
relates to how much information about neural processing within the
CNS can be extracted from MN recordings.
As MNs control muscles, one would think that their output is
tightly matched to muscle characteristics so that the full information
transfer from MNs to muscles is associated with force production.
However, numerous studies have shown that MN discharge patterns,
and therefore EMG signals, contain information that is related to brain
oscillations but not directly to force production. For example, it is well
known that cortical and EMG signals are correlated in the beta band
(13–30 Hz)9–11, which lies outside the muscle contraction dynamics12,13
and thus information in this band cannot directly influence force, at
least within a linear approximation of force production.
These classical observations raise questions about which cortical oscillations are transmitted to the output of the CNS (the MNs)
and why. They also suggest that part of the neural activity generated
in the brain, containing relevant information regarding brain states
and dynamics, may be observed in the electric fields produced by
muscles, even if it is not associated with underlying muscle contractile activity. This is because there is a mismatch between the
bandwidth of the electrical and mechanical activity of muscles:
muscle electrical signals have a broader spectral bandwidth than
mechanical muscle contraction; thus, they potentially contain more
information. EMG may offer a window through which we can look
at brain activity.

This Perspective discusses existing evidence supporting the possibility of using the activity of MN populations to estimate neural activity
originating in the CNS that is not directly involved in force production.
This introduces the concept of brain interfacing via muscle sensors,
which differs from classic EMG-based interfaces aimed at decoding the
motor command sent to the muscles to generate an intended action
or gesture. Along these lines, we envision a technology that senses
the electric fields in muscles and processes them to infer informative
brain signals, such as circuit-specific cortical oscillations at different
frequencies in patients with a brain lesion, or changes in identified
brain signals that can be used to develop models and strategies for
human–machine interaction.
The following sections introduce the key concepts that allow the
decomposition of large populations of MNs using non-invasive or
minimally invasive sensors, and the physiological basis supporting
the notion that this neural information can be used to infer ongoing
neural activity in relevant regions of the CNS, such as the motor cortex.
Finally, we propose frameworks in which MN-derived information can
be used to advance the fields of neuroimaging and neural interfacing
and improve our understanding of the neural control of movement.

Nature Biomedical Engineering

Muscle interfaces to decode the output of the CNS
The contribution of a motor unit to the electric potential recorded at a
certain point on a muscle can be modelled as a train of delta functions
convolved with the motor-unit-specific action potential waveform, as
measured from that recording point14. The EMG recording thus corresponds to the sum of the electric potentials produced by all the active
motor units and noise components.
In this model, the trains of delta functions associated with each
motor unit are the neural activity (that is, the output of the CNS) that
can be estimated through the deconvolution of the EMG signal (Fig. 2).
The possibility of identifying this neural activity from EMG signals
depends on two key properties of the biological and biophysical systems underlying muscle activity. The first property is the stability
of the synaptic connection between each MN and its muscle unit.
This connection means that each action potential travelling along
the axon of an MN determines a corresponding action potential in the
innervated muscle fibres, that is, in the corresponding muscle unit15.

Perspective
Spinal cord

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41551-025-01445-1
Motor neurons

Motor unit APs

High-density EMG

Unmixing sources

Estimated MN spikes

σ1
Σ
σ2

* W1
Σ

σ3

* W2
Σ
* W3

σ4
Σ

EMG generation

MN decomposition

Fig. 2 | Simplified model of EMG signal generation and the decomposition of
MN activity from multichannel EMG with classic deconvolution methods.
The cell body of MNs is in the ventral horn of the spinal cord. On the basis of the
synaptic inputs MNs receive, they generate trains of action potentials (APs) that
travel along their axons to the muscles. Each MN AP causes a corresponding
muscle fibre AP that travels along the muscle fibres of the motor unit formed with
the innervating MN. Placing EMG electrodes at different points on the muscle

results in recordings of the muscle fibre APs generated by different units, each
with distinct waveforms (based on the relative position of the electrode and the
recorded fibres), along with additional independent noise of standard deviation
σ. By multiplying the EMG recordings by unmixing matrices (the ‘Wi’ terms), we
can enhance the time points at which specific motor units generate APs travelling
along the muscle fibres. This provides a reliable read-out of the spiking activity of
MNs corresponding to the identified motor units.

This one-to-one relation between MNs and muscle unit action potentials implies that the spiking activity of single neurons can be measured
by identifying the action potentials produced by muscle fibres of
a motor unit. The second property is the spatial and temporal differentiation of the electrical activity that muscle fibres produce in
the surrounding volume conductor, that is, the motor unit electrical
signatures. Each motor unit is unique within the muscle in terms of
the spatial distribution of muscle fibres, neuromuscular junctions
and fibre membrane characteristics. This implies that the convolutive
filters are unique for each motor unit, at least under ideal conditions
of sampling in space and time.
Within a linear and stationary model, the two properties mentioned previously and the sparsity of spiking in individual MNs allow
us to solve the deconvolution problem and to isolate the activity of
individual MNs6,16.
The deconvolution of neural activity from invasive or non-invasive
EMG recordings can be solved by blind source separation methods customized to the convolutive nature of the mixtures and the sparsity of
the sources (Fig. 2). Alternatively, deep neural networks17 or generative
models of EMG signals and their inverse formulation18,19 can be used.
The current main aim in the development of more refined methods for
EMG deconvolution is to increase the number of decoded MNs, which
can be attained both by refinement in electrode technology and by
advances in decoding algorithms20.
The performance of current conventional methods to decode EMG
signals strongly depends on the number of neural sources relative to
the number of observations and on the stability of the action potential
waveforms of individual motor units. Because of the large number of
motor units in a muscle, only some of them can be accurately identified
by current source separation methods. Decoding is typically limited
to the sources with the greatest energy and with distinctive motor
unit action potential shapes (if two motor units produce action potentials with comparable temporal–spatial shapes, as measured from the
recording points, they will not be distinguishable)21. In addition, the
ability to decompose sources is limited in all contractions that involve
changes in joint angles, which applies to most natural tasks. In fact,
changes in muscle length and relative position with respect to the skin
during motion modify the characteristics of the volume conductor
separating the sources from the recording electrodes22,23.
Artificial-intelligence-based approaches may be used to mitigate
the above limitations. An improvement over conventional statistical

source separation methods can be obtained by training deep networks
to perform the decomposition process, using deconvolution methods
for labelling and then increasing the robustness of the network-based
decomposition by extensive data augmentation. Current models of
EMG signal generation are sufficiently realistic to provide simulated
data useful for augmenting neural-network-based decomposition
of experimental data. For example, recent studies have shown that a
realistic model of EMG signal generation can augment the training of
a network based on gate recurrent units that learn how to decompose
EMG signals, making the resultant decomposition more robust than
the original deconvolution algorithm used for labelling24. Moreover,
a hybrid architecture that combines elements of deep latent variable
models and conditional adversarial training can provide a generative
model of EMG signals that can mimic the outputs of complex numerical
models of human muscle biophysics. Such a framework can be used to
continuously sample from a dynamically changing system in real time18.
This allows us to model all factors of variability in the generation of
EMG signals and use them for data augmentation, and to derive inverse
models that estimate internal parameters (such as MN discharge patterns) based on observations.
The decomposition process can be performed in a fully unsupervised way by identifying the embedded neural code in a reduced
dimensional space, imposing constraints on the properties of this
space. For example, a proposed autoencoder learns the discharge times
of individual motor units by processing multichannel EMG recordings25.
Following preprocessing of the EMG recording via convolutive sphering, the encoder is constrained to apply an orthogonal transformation
to the spatial data and the optimization criterion enforces a temporal
sparsity constraint. Because of its encoding–decoding structure, this
method does not need to be trained on known decomposition results.

Nature Biomedical Engineering

MNs linearly transmit high-frequency
neural signals
Spinal MNs receive a barrage of synaptic inputs from afferent nerves
coding proprioceptive and other sensory information, and from spinal
and supraspinal circuits, including direct inputs from the cerebral
cortex through monosynaptic corticospinal projections26. All these
inputs are integrated and translated into spiking activity that is transmitted to muscles (Fig. 1b). Therefore, the twitches that muscle fibres
produce can be seen as the result of a complex transformation of the
net excitatory inputs that MNs receive from different sources in the

Perspective
CNS. The CNS ensures that the appropriate neural inputs are received
by MNs to generate an intended movement.
The net excitatory input received by MNs is typically modelled
as a set of independent and common synaptic inputs27. Independent
inputs represent the synaptic inputs to MNs that are not correlated
with the inputs received by other MNs in a pool. Conversely, common
synaptic inputs are those that are the same as or correlated to inputs
that (many) other MNs in the pool receive28–30. Owing to the differences
in the biophysical properties of MNs within a pool, their responses to
inputs tend to linearize and amplify the common inputs relative to
the independent inputs when the neural activity of MNs is analysed
at the population level31–35. For this reason, a group of MNs receiving
and sampling common and independent inputs can be viewed as a
neural linear amplifier of the common inputs, with very high rejection
of independent noise36. This is evident when considering the layer of
MNs as a single-layer perceptron that acts as a linear regressor if the
activation functions are linear. In the biological case, this corresponds
to considering the MNs as active approximately in the middle of their
input–output response curve37. We can therefore conclude that the
last layer of the CNS is an approximately linear one that amplifies the
common inputs it receives when considering the activity of populations of MNs that are fully recruited and not reaching saturation38. The
amount of amplification of the linear components by a group of MNs
will increase as a function of the group size36. Indeed, the observation
that common inputs to MNs act as a linearization process aligns with
population coding principles that are also observed elsewhere in the
nervous system39,40. In the retina for instance, decoding the activity of
small populations of retinal ganglion cells rapidly saturates information extraction, indicating that a few neurons can effectively represent
the encoded information when it is commonly distributed41. Similar
results have been observed in the auditory system using multiple spike
trains in auditory receptor neurons42.
The linearization performed by MNs applies to any common inputs
they receive; groups of MNs can effectively transmit multiple sources
of information at different frequencies simultaneously35. Figure 3
exemplifies this property of MNs in a simulation in which a group of
MNs receives common inputs at different frequencies along with independent inputs (different for each MN). Simple band-pass filtering of
the sum of the spike trains of all MNs allows a reliable estimation and
separation of the common inputs at multiple frequencies.
The conversion from motor unit action potentials into muscle
force can be modelled as a second-order critically damped filter,
which strongly attenuates high-frequency neural inputs to muscles (here we consider high-frequency inputs to muscles as those
above ~10 Hz)12,13,43,44. Indeed, the frequency of movements and forces
produced by limbs are constrained to rather low frequencies, with
(pathological) tremors representing the highest frequencies that
can be measured in the arms and hands45,46. However, and somewhat surprisingly, the neural inputs that MNs receive, and therefore
their outputs, go far beyond the maximum working frequencies of
muscles. This can be experimentally observed when decoding a
large number of MNs that can show common activity at frequencies
>70–80 Hz (ref. 20). This neural information may consist of different
components, spanning various frequency ranges, originating from
diverse regions of the nervous system that project into the MN pools.
Given the characteristics of how muscle transforms neural inputs
into forces, this broad spectrum of common inputs suggests that a
substantial portion of the common synaptic inputs to MNs will be
transmitted along their axons without having a direct influence on
muscle forces (Fig. 4). These high-frequency inputs may be associated with ongoing activity in the CNS, reaching and modulating the
firing patterns of MNs. Because of the linear transmission by MN
populations, extraction of this high-frequency activity, which does
not directly affect forces, can be achieved using standard linear
separation methods (Fig. 3).
Nature Biomedical Engineering

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41551-025-01445-1

Accessing brain activity through MNs
Identifying the sources contributing to the high-frequency activity
in MNs and understanding why this activity reaches MNs are relevant
challenges to advance in the framework of MN-based CNS interfaces.
Given the limitations of non-invasive neuroimaging technologies
to record signals originating in the CNS, the interpretation of the
high-frequency activity in the MNs is complex, particularly due to the
lack of reference signals guiding the analysis. By simultaneously recording brain and muscle activity, many studies have consistently shown
that the oscillatory activities at 20–30 Hz (beta rhythms) and 40–50 Hz
(low gamma rhythms) carried by MNs have a cortical origin9,10,47–54.
This implies that muscles are to some extent driven by the cortical
rhythms that are encoded by MNs. For MNs to provide valuable information about the ongoing cortical activity that they receive, the characteristics of the corticospinal transmission of such signals must be
stable over time. Also, to implement neural interfaces with the brain
with MNs, transmission needs to be established with relatively small
delays, and modulations of cortical oscillatory inputs to MNs need to
be strong enough to be clearly sensed from MNs.
Neurons in the corticospinal tract, the main descending pathway
connecting the brain and MNs, are entrained by ongoing activity in
neighbouring areas of the motor cortex, such as beta and gamma
rhythms55,56. Although highly heterogeneous and complex pathways
connect cortical neurons and MNs, cortical neural activity is effectively
and reliably transmitted to the muscles through the fastest and most
straightforward pathways because of the distribution of transmission
delays across the thousands of channels connecting the motor cortex
to MNs57. This implies that MNs can provide a timely and stable read-out
of ongoing cortical neural activity. Figure 5a shows an example of the
linear association, measured using spectral coherence58, between
cortical and MN frequency components, specifically beta rhythms
that are prominent during sustained contractions. On average, there
is a time delay of approximately 28 ms between cortical signals and
MN activity (Fig. 5b), which corresponds to the expected transmission
delays in the fastest pathways connecting the motor cortex and the
measured muscle, in this example, the tibialis anterior muscle. These
results show the fast transmission of cortical rhythmic activity to the
muscles, supporting the idea that decoding MN from muscle sensors
enables interfacing with the motor cortex.
The use of muscle recordings to characterize the functional connection between the brain and MNs, as well as to estimate brain signals
indirectly, can be further examined using neurofeedback paradigms.
For example, neurofeedback paradigms led participants to modify the
coherence amplitudes in the beta band during sustained contractions,
without changing the elicited forces59. Other studies used real-time
decoding of EMG signals into MN activities to train participants to
volitionally modulate rhythmic beta activity (13–30 Hz) in the neural drive to muscles60,61. After a relatively short training process, this
muscle-based neurofeedback paradigm led to changes in the beta activity detected in muscles and in cortical electroencephalography (EEG).
Results further indicated that beta events (or bursts) identified in the
muscles during sustained contractions had a similar duration and rate
of detection of bursts to beta events identified from the motor cortex,
suggesting that the beta activity transmitted by MNs has a primarily
supraspinal origin. Investigating optimal ways to deliver feedback
to participants may allow us to gain a deeper insight into the characteristics of the high-frequency neural signals sampled by MNs, study
how well participants can learn to modulate high-frequency inputs to
muscles during different types of motor tasks, and generate models
explaining the functional roles of these types of input to muscles.
When recordings of muscle activity occur during long periods
of steady muscle contractions, the observed fluctuations in cortical
rhythmic activity projected to MNs are moderate but strong enough to
be detected in relatively small groups of MNs; for example, around 12
motor units were identified and tracked in real time per participant in

Perspective

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41551-025-01445-1

a

c

Common inputs

PSD of individual spike trains

PSD of the CST

MN
pool

MN
1

Independent
input 1

MN
2

Independent
input 2

MN
177
10 Hz

Independent
input 3

b

d

Common input

Common input (2–4 Hz)

Common input (20–22 Hz)

Common input (44–46 Hz)

CST

CST (2–4 Hz)

CST (20–22 Hz)

CST (44–46 Hz)
1s

5s

Fig. 3 | Linearization of common input transmission by MNs. a, Simulation of a
group of 177 MNs receiving a common input (sum of 3 inputs at 2–4 Hz, 21 Hz and
45 Hz) plus an independent input that is different for each MN. b, Raster plot with
the spike trains of the simulated MNs. Each row represents the spiking activity of
a simulated MN. c, Power spectral densities (PSDs) of the spike trains produced by
the individual MNs (top) and of the composite spike train (sum of all spike trains;
bottom). The mean of the signals was subtracted to obtain the PSD. The arrows
represent the peaks in the PSD at the frequencies of the common inputs. d, The
common input to the MNs and the band-pass-filtered versions of the common
input at different frequencies (top four plots) and the resulting cumulative
spike train (CST; bottom four plots) and its filtered version at the frequencies
of the components contributing to the common inputs. To simulate the results

in this figure, a previously validated model was used27,91. The model simulated
the spiking activity of 177 MNs driven by common and independent inputs. The
common input was a signal obtained by summing white Gaussian noise filtered
in 3 bands (2–4 Hz, 20–22 Hz and 44–46 Hz). The three filtered signals were
normalized in power before summing them. The common input also included a
direct current component so that the simulated number of inputs arriving from
the common projection per 0.2-ms time step was 1.7 (which is equivalent to each
MN receiving 8,500 impulses per second). In addition to the common input, MNs
also received independent inputs that were modelled as white Gaussian noise
with mean equal to the variance. The level of the independent input was adjusted
to make MNs fire at physiologically realistic levels during low-force contractions.

the neurofeedback experiments31. To further investigate how strongly
the power of high-frequency (>10 Hz) cortical projections to MNs can
fluctuate and how these changes can alter corticospinal transmission,
it becomes relevant to use experimental approaches that induce strong
changes in high-frequency motor cortical oscillations during steady
contractions62–64. A study65 assessed the magnitude and consistency
of changes in the spectral contents of motor unit population activity
during a movement preparation and cancellation paradigm. Two types
of trial were designed for this, ‘go’ and ‘no-go’ trials, guided by auditory cues. During the trials, participants holding a tonic contraction

of ankle dorsiflexion were first given a warning stimulus to prepare a
motor response (ballistic contraction), and 1 s later they received an
imperative stimulus that required them to either release the prepared
action (go trials) or to cancel the preparation but keep holding the
stable contraction (no-go trials). Cancellation of a prepared action
is known to be associated with strong increases in cortical beta activity, which may have a role in preventing changes in motor cortical
outputs64,66. The study showed that while participants successfully
held the sustained contractions in the no-go trials, salient changes in
power across different spectral bands in the MNs could be observed

Nature Biomedical Engineering

Perspective

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41551-025-01445-1

Motor command

High-frequency
inputs to MN
High-frequency inputs

Motor
command

Muscle
electrical
signals
MN
pool

Spinal
cord

Neural drive
to muscles

Fig. 4 | Separation of common synaptic inputs to MNs. MN pools can sample multiple common synaptic inputs. The low-frequency inputs control the level of muscle
contraction to determine movement12,43,44. The high-frequency inputs do not interfere with movement directly but they are still encoded by the trains of action
potentials travelling along MNs and muscle fibres and can be decoded.

(see data from a representative participant in Fig. 6a). Some of these
changes (between 13–30 Hz and 30–45 Hz) were related to changes
in cortical activity occurring in parallel with the cancellation of the
prepared action in the no-go trials65. These results provide evidence
of successful corticospinal transmission of salient cortical oscillations
without changes in motor outputs. This further supports the concept
that MNs can simultaneously control force production and receive,
and be driven by, high-frequency inputs from distal areas in the CNS.
Further support for this idea can be found in a study67 that provides
consistent evidence of corticomuscular transmission of beta bursts
occurring without any detectable changes in the force produced by
tonically contracted muscles (Fig. 6b).
The previous studies suggest that MN activity may allow us to distinguish brain states related to different types of mental processing. In
another study68, MN activity was decoded during steady contractions
while participants performed different types of mental task (right foot
motor imagery, imagining movements of both hands, mathematical mental operation or not focusing on any specific tasks). Using a
filter bank and a linear classifier, the mental tasks could be classified in some participants with moderate to low accuracies, using only
high-frequency components in the MN activity as input features for
classification. Furthermore, the modulations in high-frequency components were incompatible with changes in force level. This study
replicated classic brain-interfacing approaches based on imagery with
peripheral recordings, showing that some mental task-induced oscillations from supraspinal areas may leak down to MNs, allowing the discrimination of mental tasks above chance level via EMG. This study also
involved imagining non-motor tasks, further supporting the notion
that MN activity may be used to retrieve information about ongoing
brain activity, even if it is not associated with motor processing.
Overall, there is consistent evidence that MNs receive and encode
rhythmic activity that does not modulate forces and that have origins
in the brain, for example, in the motor cortex. To further advance in
the interpretation and use of high-frequency neural inputs to MNs,
Nature Biomedical Engineering

it becomes critical that multiple common inputs to MNs can be separated. This should be possible using standard spectral separation
techniques if the different neural inputs to MNs are independent and
have non-overlapping spectral bandwidths. However, this may not
be expected if neural inputs have large bandwidths or if they are only
transmitted to MNs through relatively small neural populations. In
such a case, the inputs will present harmonic components that can be
summed with neural sources in other frequency bands, with nonlinear
mechanisms. An alternative possibility in this context is to use other
source separation methods that rely on the statistical properties of
the inputs to be decoded. These methods may take advantage of the
fact that inputs to MNs arising from different parts of the CNS may
have distinct patterns of projections to MNs within a muscle or to
the groups of muscles they innervate69,70. Alternatively, spike prediction models may be implemented to estimate upstream neural
activity from downstream spiking behaviour71–73. A recently proposed
reinforcement-learning-based point process framework has been used
to generatively predict spike trains through behaviour-level rewards74,
that is, by using behavioural information to reduce the complexity of
estimating neural activity in higher centres from downstream activity. The framework could be used to estimate the neural information
associated with movement from the spiking activity of MNs encoding
cortical information and, as a consequence, the activity that does not
influence movement.

Prospects of the peripheral neural interfaces
with the CNS
The ability to decode CNS signals from MN activity presents an exciting opportunity to access neural information that would otherwise
be difficult to obtain non-invasively in unconstrained contexts. This
is especially important for understanding neural activity in deep brain
structures and spinal circuits, which are not currently measurable
with existing technologies but may project their activity onto MNs in
specific motor contexts.

Perspective

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41551-025-01445-1

a Brain and muscle recordings during isometric contractions

b Directed coherence
0.2

Coherence

EEG
0.1

Force
tracking
task
10

Cumulant density

20
30
Frequency (Hz)

40

50

~28 ms

Normalized units

HD-EMG

Force
sensor

1s

–100

0
Lag (ms)

100

Fig. 5 | Stable transmission of cortical activity to muscles. Simultaneous
recordings of brain and muscle activity to assess their neural connectivity.
a, The EEG signal from the primary motor cortex (blue trace) and high-density
EMG (HD-EMG) recording from the tibialis anterior muscle were acquired while
the ankle produced an isometric flexion force (at approximately 10% of the
maximum force that the study participant could generate). The MN activity
decoded from the HD-EMG recording was analysed together with the EEG
recordings from the scalp area above the cortical representation of the studied
muscle. b, Corticomuscular coherence in the descending direction (brain to

muscle; top) provides evidence for the linear transmission of cortical activity
at ~20 Hz to MNs. The analysis of the temporal association between the cortical
and MN activity (bottom) indicates a lag between the correlated activity in
the 2 recordings of ~28 ms, which corresponds to the average brain–muscle
transmission delays through the fastest neural routes connecting the brain and
the tibialis anterior92. The red traces indicate the data from one representative
participant; the grey traces are the average group data (n = 19 participants). Panel
b adapted from ref. 57 under a Creative Commons license CC BY 4.0.

The possibility of using MNs as an indirect measure of the human
brain is promising in the development of neural interfaces. Having
access to large populations of MNs during a variety of motor conditions is expected to lead to improved estimates of high-frequency
signals encoded by MNs and to a more refined understanding of how
these signals co-vary with behaviour. Neural interfaces based on MN
recordings may provide access to both spinal and brain signals, as long
as the connectivity between circuits in the CNS and the muscles is not
disrupted by a lesion. With modern EMG recording and processing
techniques, we can now track the activity of large volumes of MNs with
increasing precision and generalizability, both across participants and
out of the laboratory, making this a viable approach for man–machine
interfaces20,22,75,76. This type of interfacing can be accomplished with
minimally invasive or even non-invasive devices, allowing for potentially large information transfer by simultaneously and accurately
measuring multiple neurons. It also requires minimal calibration and
may achieve long-term stability in tracking individual motor units
across multiple sessions if the position of the EMG electrodes is maintained relative to the measured muscles77,78.
Using MNs to develop an interface with the human brain may
be particularly interesting for expanding human motor abilities by
allowing people to control artificial limbs concurrently with their
natural limbs79. The difficulty in realizing such motor augmentation is
to identify neural signals that can be controlled independently from
and in coordination with natural motor control signals80, and to transform the extracted information that is outside the motor space into a

command that can allow a meaningful control of an electronic device81.
MNs can be measured using wearable sensors and may transmit simultaneously low- and high-frequency neural contents to muscles. If some
of the high-frequency signals transmitted to muscles are not directly
linked to motor function, they may represent a resource for expanding
the number of degrees of freedom that humans can control without
interfering with the movements of natural limbs, which could allow
movement of different parts in the body (see concept in Fig. 7).
As a step towards this goal, real-time decomposition of MN activity allowed participants to control two components of the spectral
content encoded by MNs60. After brief periods of training, participants
could partially dissociate the activity in the two frequency bands that
they had to control independently. This provides proof of concept
that it is possible to extend the degrees of freedom that a single muscle can control (from one to two in this case). To advance this line
of research, work is now needed to identify methods to extract and
classify high-frequency signals in MNs and develop optimal training
protocols that enable humans to control neural processes originating in the brain and transmitting through the muscles. One promising
direction would involve the data-driven extraction of latent variables
from MN behaviour that are orthogonal to movement kinematics. This
could be done using artificial-intelligence-based approaches applied
to dynamic modelling and latent factor analysis of MN populations82–84.
Approaches that enable the identification of behaviourally relevant
subspaces from cortical activity could be adapted to dynamic systems
at the spinal level using MN data decomposed from muscle recordings.

Nature Biomedical Engineering

Perspective

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41551-025-01445-1

a Forces in go and no-go trials

b
IS

Spectral changes in MNs (no-go trials)

Frequency (Hz)

IS

30

30

0
40

15

0
60

15
5

–1

Time (s)

0

0

2

35
25
15
5

–2

Time (ms)

35

0.07

25
15
5

–0.07

Time (ms)

0.3
0

–0.3
5
–2

–6

Time (ms)

∆ coherence (%)

60

WS

Change
in power
(%)

Frequency
(Hz)

No-go
trials

25

∆ power (%)

10% MVC

Frequency
(Hz)

Go
trials

6

35

∆ power (%)

Frequency
(Hz)

ON versus OFF

∆ grip
(a.u.)

WS

–300

–150

0
Time (ms)

150

300

Fig. 6 | Evidence for changes in high-frequency signals sampled by MNs
that do not translate into force changes during isometric contractions.
a, Changes in different frequency bands in the MN activity during the preparation
and cancellation of a motor task in a go/no-go paradigm. Top: force traces from
a representative participant in a study using a go/no-go paradigm to measure
changes in high-frequency MN activity. In each trial, participants had to mildly
activate the tibialis anterior muscle (producing a dorsiflexion force of 10% of
the maximum voluntary contraction (MVC) achievable by each participant).
After some time keeping the force stable, participants were presented with
two cues: a warning stimulus (WS) informed about the upcoming imperative
stimulus (IS), which was given 1 s after the WS. The IS could either mean that
participants had to perform a fast dorsiflexion with the minimum reaction
time possible (go trials) or that they had to remain in the same position without
changing the produced force with the ankle (no-go trials). Bottom: results
from the same representative participant as that in the top panel. From this
participant, 38 motor units could be decomposed and tracked across 46 valid
no-go trials. The composite spike train (summing the activity of all identified
motor units) was obtained and then a continuous wavelet transform analysis
was used to analyse the time–frequency changes in the composite spike train

signal. The results reflect important changes in power at 3 frequencies (around
8 Hz, 20 Hz and 46 Hz). In the average results across participants, significant
changes could only be found at frequencies above 15 Hz (ref. 65). Colour scales
were adapted to 3 frequency ranges (5–15 Hz, 15–30 Hz and 30–60 Hz). These
results motivate the investigation of high-frequency signals in MNs as a potential
resource for indirectly studying changes in the CNS (data from ref. 65). b, Results
from a study67 combining magnetoencephalography with EMG to analyse the
corticomuscular transmission of beta activity during sustained contractions.
The figure shows the averaged segments of brain recordings in which beta
bursts are detected (top) and the corresponding activity in the muscles
(second panel), which aligns with the beta modulations in the brain. The
coherence measurements between brain and muscle signals (third panel)
provide consistent evidence of the common origin of the beta activity measured
in the brain and muscle. Finally, the bottom panel shows how forces are kept
unaltered during periods of strong beta modulation at the level of the brain and
muscle (the plot shows the average and s.d. of the measured forces across all
trials considered to generate these plots). In all four plots in panel b, ∆ refers to
changes in the measured magnitude. a.u., arbitrary units. Panel b adapted from
ref. 67 under a Creative Commons license CC BY 4.0.

This would allow for the separation of the behaviourally relevant and
irrelevant latent factors that drive motor unit activity. Alternatively,
neurofeedback on MNs may be used to train the CNS to increase the
number of motor commands to muscles to reach augmented control85.
Decoding cortical activity from wearable sensors in the limbs to
monitor brain states, without direct brain recordings, may also be used
to refine existing interventions that guide neural changes in the CNS
through non-invasive stimulation86,87. MN-based information can be
used in neuromodulation interventions, such as in closed-loop brain
stimulation approaches in which the information on the brain state that
triggers the stimulation is obtained from a peripheral recording. This
strategy may encounter problems when the delay introduced by conduction to the periphery poses major constraints on the closed-loop
algorithm88. However, in applications where this delay is not a problem,
such recordings would have several advantages with respect to current closed-loop brain stimulation approaches that estimate brain
states directly from brain recordings86. First, electrical or magnetic
stimulation of the CNS produces large artefacts that strongly affect
brain recordings, but they have little impact on muscle recordings
that should not affect the accuracy in decoding the spiking activity

of MNs89. Second, oscillations at high frequencies can presumably be
better identified from direct neural cell spike trains, as in the case of
MN decoding, than from the interference EEG signals recorded from
the scalp. Finally, if oscillations in a frequency band decoded from MNs
are caused only by cortical projections, or if the contributions from
different sources to a given frequency band of the spectral contents
in MN activity can be separated (for example, by using separation
methods), then it would not be necessary to separate multiple cortical sources that oscillate simultaneously at overlapping frequencies.
In fact, in this context MNs are expected to provide reliable estimates
of modulations in cortical rhythmic activity based on simulations of
corticospinal projections to MNs.

Nature Biomedical Engineering

Considerations and limitations
This Perspective underscores recent strides made in the analysis and
interpretation of muscle recordings, aiming to motivate further exploration into harnessing the information encoded by MNs about CNS
activity. The promise of muscle-based neural interfaces is evident in
their practicality and potential for real-world applications76. However,
it is important to consider the current state of techniques and systems

Perspective
a

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41551-025-01445-1

b
High-frequency
inputs
Motor
inputs

Fig. 7 | Human motor augmentation extending the number of control signals
extracted from human muscles. In the field of human motor augmentation, a
key question relates to the extraction of neural information from the brain that
allows humans to control artificial effectors. a, Schematic of limb augmentation,
inspired by Stelarc’s third-hand art project (stelarc.org). b, The spinal cord
projects multiple signals to the MN pools innervating muscles. Inputs common
to all MNs in a muscle and outside the motor band are linearly transmitted to

muscles and are partly associated with ongoing brain activity. These highfrequency inputs to MNs and muscles may be used to augment the degrees of
freedom that humans can use to control natural limbs and artificial effectors.
In this view, the electric fields that can be measured over the human body reflect
the activity of muscles that can be tracked back to cortical brain signals, thereby
yielding a brain interface from peripheral sensors placed on limbs.

used to extract MN information from muscles, such as the reliance of
MN-based interfaces on muscle activation. Information at the entry
points of MNs becomes accessible only upon their recruitment and
firing. A critical challenge facing EMG-based MN recording methods
is decoding MNs during dynamic contractions. As muscles and limbs
initiate movement, the stability of the shape of the motor unit action
potential diminishes, rendering linear decomposition methods unreliable for identifying and tracking single MNs. While recent literature suggests various approaches to address this limitation18,22,24, non-invasive
systems capable of tracking MNs during unrestricted movements are
yet to be realized, constraining the applicability of MN-based neural interfaces beyond laboratory settings. Moreover, to accurately
estimate neural inputs to MNs from their outputs during dynamic
conditions, it is imperative to reliably model neuromodulatory processes at the MN membrane. Such processes may transiently disrupt
the linear input–output curves of MNs. Although these fluctuations
may not substantially impede the extraction of common inputs from
an MN pool across different frequencies, they could introduce noise,
compromising the fidelity with which modulations in various common inputs are tracked37,90. At present, we still do not understand the
functional roles of high-frequency inputs to MNs with cortical origin,
such as beta and gamma activity, nor their link with motor control.
Therefore, it is difficult to predict the range of applications that may
be developed by having access to this type of information from MNs.
Further research is needed to explore how MNs can give a handle on
the high-frequency inputs.

References

Conclusion
In this Perspective, we argue that the electric fields generated by muscles in our bodies may provide an indirect observation of neural activity
that originates in the CNS and is transmitted through MNs and muscles
without directly modulating forces. These fields reflect the behaviour of
neurons that constitute the output layer of the neural network formed
by the nervous system. As at least part of the information that arrives
at the output of the nervous system is known to originate in regions of
the CNS such as the cortex, recording from muscle tissue may allow us
to establish a type of human interfacing not only with the peripheral
nervous system but also with the CNS. The presence of cortical oscillations in the activity of MNs opens opportunities of interfacing with
applications that range from neurofeedback to human movement
augmentation.
Nature Biomedical Engineering

1.

2.
3.
4.

5.
6.

7.
8.

9.

10.
11.
12.

13.

14.

15.

Liddell, E. G. T. & Sherrington, C. S. Recruitment and some other
features of reflex inhibition. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. B 97, 488–518
(1997).
Sherrington, C. S. The Integrative Action of the Nervous System
(Yale Univ. Press, 1906).
Duraivel, S. et al. High-resolution neural recordings improve the
accuracy of speech decoding. Nat. Commun. 14, 6938 (2023).
Willett, F. R., Avansino, D. T., Hochberg, L. R., Henderson, J. M. &
Shenoy, K. High-performance brain-to-text communication via
handwriting. Nature 593, 249–254 (2021).
Nurmikko, A. Challenges for large-scale cortical interfaces.
Neuron 108, 259–269 (2020).
Merletti, R., Holobar, A. & Farina, D. Analysis of motor units with
high-density surface electromyography. J. Electromyogr. Kinesiol.
18, 879–890 (2008).
Gandevia, S. Spinal and supraspinal factors in human muscle
fatigue. Physiol. Rev. 81, 1725–1789 (2001).
Farina, D. et al. Man/machine interface based on the discharge
timings of spinal motor neurons after targeted muscle
reinnervation. Nat. Biomed. Eng. 1, 0025 (2017).
Conway, B. A. et al. Synchronization between motor cortex
and spinal motoneuronal pool during the performance of a
maintained motor task in man. J. Physiol. 489, 917–924 (1995).
Mima, T., Ohara, S. & Nagamine, T. Cortical–muscular coherence.
Int. Congr. Ser. 1226, 109–119 (2002).
Baker, S. N. Oscillatory interactions between sensorimotor cortex
and the periphery. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 17, 649–655 (2007).
Baldissera, F., Cavallari, P. & Cerri, G. Motoneuronal
pre-compensation for the low-pass filter characteristics of
muscle. A quantitative appraisal in cat muscle units. J. Physiol.
511, 611–627 (1998).
Cisi, R. R. L. & Kohn, A. F. Simulation system of spinal cord motor
nuclei and associated nerves and muscles, in a web-based
architecture. J. Comput. Neurosci. 25, 520–542 (2008).
Merletti, R. & Muceli, S. Tutorial. Surface EMG detection in space
and time: best practices. J. Electromyogr. Kinesiol. 49, 102363
(2019).
Adrian, E. D. & Bronk, D. W. The discharge of impulses in motor
nerve fibres: part II. The frequency of discharge in reflex and
voluntary contractions. J. Physiol. 67, i3–151 (1929).

Perspective
16. Kline, J. C. & Luca, C. J. D. Error reduction in EMG signal
decomposition. J. Neurophysiol. 112, 2718–2728 (2018).
17. Wen, Y. et al. A deep CNN framework for neural drive estimation
from HD-EMG across contraction intensities and joint angles.
IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 30, 2950–2959 (2022).
18. Ma, S. et al. Conditional generative models for simulation of EMG
during naturalistic movements. IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn.
Syst. 36, 9224–9237 (2025).
19. Clarke, A. K. et al. Deep learning for robust decomposition of
high-density surface EMG signals. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 68,
526–534 (2021).
20. Muceli, S. et al. Blind identification of the spinal cord output in
humans with high-density electrode arrays implanted in muscles.
Sci. Adv. 8, 2003–2005 (2022).
21. Holobar, A. & Zazula, D. Multichannel blind source separation
using convolution kernel compensation. IEEE Trans. Signal
Process. 55, 4487–4496 (2007).
22. Glaser, V. & Holobar, A. Motor unit identification from highdensity surface electromyograms in repeated dynamic muscle
contractions. IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 27, 66–75
(2019).
23. Glaser, V., Holobar, A. & Zazula, D. Real-time motor unit
identification from high-density surface EMG. IEEE Trans. Neural
Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 21, 949–958 (2013).
24. Maksymenko, K., Clarke, A. K., Mendez Guerra, I.,
Deslauriers-Gauthier, S. & Farina, D. A myoelectric digital twin for
fast and realistic modelling in deep learning. Nat. Commun. 14,
1600 (2023).
25. Mayer, K. M. S., Del Vecchio, A., Eskofier, B. M. & Farina, D.
Unsupervised neural decoding of signals recorded by thin-film
electrode arrays implanted in muscles using autoencoding with
a physiologically derived optimisation criterion. Biomed. Signal
Process. Control 86, 105178 (2023).
26. Lemon, R. N. Descending pathways in motor control. Annu. Rev.
Neurosci. 31, 195–218 (2008).
27. Williams, E. R. & Baker, S. N. Circuits generating corticomuscular
coherence investigated using a biophysically based
computational model. I. Descending systems. J. Neurophysiol.
101, 31–41 (2009).
28. Farmer, S. F., Bremner, F. D., Halliday, D. M., Rosenberg, J. R. &
Stephens, J. A. The frequency content of common synaptic inputs
to motoneurones studied during voluntary isometric contraction
in man. J. Physiol. 470, 127–155 (1993).
29. Nordstrom, M. A., Fuglevand, A. J. & Enoka, R. M. Estimating the
strength of common input to human motoneurons from the
cross-correlogram. J. Physiol. 453, 547–574 (1992).
30. De Luca, C. J. & Erim, Z. Common drive of motor units in
regulation of muscle force. Trends Neurosci. 17, 299–305 (1994).
31. Farina, D. & Negro, F. Common synaptic input to motor neurons,
motor unit synchronization, and force control. Exerc. Sport Sci.
Rev. 43, 23–33 (2015).
32. Feeney, D. F., Meyer, F. G., Noone, N. & Enoka, R. A latent
low-dimensional common input drives a pool of motor neurons:
a probabilistic latent state-space model. J. Neurophysiol. 118,
2238–2250 (2017).
33. Feeney, D. F., Mani, D. & Enoka, R. M. Variability in common
synaptic input to motor neurons modulates both force steadiness
and pegboard time in young and older adults. J. Physiol. 596,
3793–3806 (2018).
34. Umeda, T., Isa, T. & Nishimura, Y. Temporal dynamics of the
sensorimotor convergence underlying voluntary limb movement.
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 119, e2208353119 (2022).
35. Nakao, M., Norimatsu, M., Mizutani, Y. & Yamamoto, M. Spectral
distortion properties of the integral pulse frequency modulation
model. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 44, 419–426 (1997).
Nature Biomedical Engineering

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41551-025-01445-1
36. Farina, D., Negro, F. & Dideriksen, J. L. The effective neural drive
to muscles is the common synaptic input to motor neurons.
J. Physiol. 592, 3427–3441 (2014).
37. Revill, A. L. & Fuglevand, A. J. Inhibition linearizes firing rate
responses in human motor units: implications for the role of
persistent inward currents. J. Physiol. 595, 179–191 (2017).
38. Enoka, R. Physiological validation of the decomposition of surface
EMG signals. J. Electromyogr. Kinesiol. 46, 70–83 (2019).
39. Averbeck, B. B., Latham, P. E. & Pouget, A. Neural correlations,
population coding and computation. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 7,
358–366 (2006).
40. de la Rocha, J., Doiron, B., Shea-Brown, E., Josić, K. & Reyes, A.
Correlation between neural spike trains increases with firing rate.
Nature 448, 802–806 (2007).
41. Warland, D. K., Reinagel, P. & Meister, M. Decoding visual
information from a population of retinal ganglion cells.
J. Neurophysiol. 78, 2336–2350 (1997).
42. Sabourin, P. & Pollack, G. S. Temporal coding by populations
of auditory receptor neurons. J. Neurophysiol. 103, 1614–1621
(2010).
43. Partridge, L. D. Modifications of neural output signals by muscles:
a frequency response study. J. Appl. Physiol. 20, 150–156 (1965).
44. Partridge, L. D. & Benton, L. A. in Handbook of Physiology: section
1. The nervous system II. Motor control, part 1 (ed. Brooks, V. B.)
43–106 (American Physiological Society, 1981).
45. Raethjen, J., Govindan, R. B., Kopper, F., Muthuraman, M. &
Deuschl, G. Cortical involvement in the generation of essential
tremor. J. Neurophysiol. 97, 3219–3228 (2007).
46. Elble, R. J. Report from a U.S. conference on essential tremor.
Mov. Disord. 21, 2052–2061 (2006).
47. Novembre, G. et al. The effect of salient stimuli on neural
oscillations, isometric force, and their coupling. NeuroImage 198,
221–230 (2019).
48. Schoffelen, J., Poort, J., Oostenveld, R. & Fries, P. Selective
movement preparation is subserved by selective increases
in corticomuscular gamma-band coherence. J. Neurosci. 31,
6750–6758 (2011).
49. Schoffelen, J., Oostenveld, R. & Fries, P. Neuronal coherence as a
mechanism of effective corticospinal interaction. Science 308,
111–113 (2005).
50. Mima, T., Steger, J., Schulman, A. E., Gerloff, C. & Hallett, M.
Electroencephalographic measurement of motor cortex control
of muscle activity in humans. Clin. Neurophysiol. 111, 326–337
(2000).
51. Omlor, W., Patino, L., Hepp-Reymond, M.-C. & Kristeva, R.
Gamma-range corticomuscular coherence during dynamic force
output. NeuroImage 34, 1191–1198 (2007).
52. Mehrkanoon, S., Breakspear, M. & Boonstra, T. W. The
reorganization of corticomuscular coherence during a transition
between sensorimotor states. NeuroImage 100, 692–702 (2014).
53. Petersen, T. H., Willerslev-Olsen, M., Conway, B. A. & Nielsen, J. B.
The motor cortex drives the muscles during walking in human
subjects. J. Physiol. 590, 2443–2452 (2012).
54. Halliday, D. M., Conway, B. A., Farmer, S. F. & Rosenberg, J. R.
Using electroencephalography to study functional coupling
between cortical activity and electromyograms during voluntary
contractions in humans. Neurosci. Lett. 241, 5–8 (1998).
55. Jackson, A., Spinks, R. L., Freeman, T. C. B., Wolpert, D. M.
& Lemon, R. N. Rhythm generation in monkey motor cortex
explored using pyramidal tract stimulation. J. Physiol. 541,
685–699 (2002).
56. Baker, S. N., Pinches, E. M. & Lemon, R. N. Synchronization in
monkey motor cortex during a precision grip task. II. Effect of
oscillatory activity on corticospinal output. J. Neurophysiol. 89,
1941–1953 (2003).

Perspective
57. Ibáñez, J., Del Vecchio, A., Rothwell, J. C., Baker, S. N. &
Farina, D. Only the fastest corticospinal fibers contribute to β
corticomuscular coherence. J. Neurosci. 41, 4867–4879 (2021).
58. Halliday, D. M. Nonparametric directionality measures for time
series and point process data. J. Integr. Neurosci. 14, 253–277
(2015).
59. von Carlowitz-Ghori, K., Bayraktaroglu, Z., Waterstraat, G., Curio, G.
& Nikulin, V. V. Voluntary control of corticomuscular coherence
strength through neurofeedback: a proof-of-principle study in
healthy subjects. Neuroscience 290, 243–254 (2015).
60. Bräcklein, M., Ibáñez, J., Barsakcioglu, D. & Farina, D. Towards
human motor augmentation by voluntary decoupling beta
activity in the neural drive to muscle and force production.
J. Neural Eng. 18, 016001 (2021).
61. Bräcklein, M., Barsakcioglu, D., Del Vecchio, A., Ibáñez, J. &
Farina, D. Reading and modulating cortical beta bursts from
motor unit spiking activity. J. Neurosci. 42, 3611–3621 (2022).
62. Kaufman, M. T., Churchland, M. M., Ryu, S. I. & Shenoy, K.
Cortical activity in the null space: permitting preparation without
movement. Nat. Neurosci. 17, 440–448 (2014).
63. Ibáñez, J., Hannah, R., Rocchi, L. & Rothwell, J. C. Premovement
suppression of corticospinal excitability may be a necessary part
of movement preparation. Cereb. Cortex 30, 2910–2923 (2020).
64. Wessel, J. R. β-Bursts reveal the trial-to-trial dynamics of move­
ment initiation and cancellation. J. Neurosci. 40, 411–423 (2020).
65. Zicher, B., Avrillon, S., Ibáñez, J. & Farina, D. Changes in
high-frequency neural inputs to muscles during movement
cancellation. J. Neural Eng. 21, 056039 (2024).
66. Nakata, H., Sakamoto, K., Otsuka, A., Yumoto, M. & Kakigi, R.
Cortical rhythm of no-go processing in humans: an MEG study.
Clin. Neurophysiol. 124, 273–282 (2013).
67. Echeverria-Altuna, I. et al. Transient beta activity and
cortico-muscular connectivity during sustained motor behaviour.
Prog. Neurobiol. 214, 102281 (2022).
68. Ofner, P., Lee, M., Farina, D. & Mehring, C. Mental tasks modulate
motor-units above 10 Hz and are a potential control signal for
movement augmentation: a preliminary study. In Proc. 45th
Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in
Medicine and Biology Society (EMBC) (IEEE, 2023).
69. Stephens, J. A., Garnett, R. & Buller, N. P. Reversal of recruitment
order of single motor units produced by cutaneous stimulation
during voluntary muscle contraction in man. Nature 272, 362–364
(1978).
70. Baker, S. N. The primate reticulospinal tract, hand function and
functional recovery. J. Physiol. 589, 5603–5612 (2011).
71. Truccolo, W., Eden, U. T., Fellows, M. R., Donoghue, J. P. &
Brown, E. N. A point process framework for relating neural
spiking activity to spiking history, neural ensemble, and extrinsic
covariate effects. J. Neurophysiol. 93, 1074–1089 (2005).
72. Qian, C. et al. Nonlinear modeling of neural interaction for spike
prediction using the staged point-process model. Neural Comput.
30, 3189–3226 (2018).
73. Qian, C. et al. Binless kernel machine: modeling spike train
transformation for cognitive neural prostheses. Neural Comput.
32, 1863–1900 (2020).
74. Wu, S. et al. Generative neural spike prediction from upstream
neural activity via behavioral reinforcement. Preprint at bioRxiv
https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.07.25.550495 (2023).
75. Wang, Y. et al. Electrically compensated, tattoo-like electrodes
for epidermal electrophysiology at scale. Sci. Adv. 6, eabd0996
(2020).
76. CTRL-labs at Reality Labs, Sussillo, D., Kaifosh, P. & Reardon, T.
A generic noninvasive neuromotor interface for human-computer
interaction. Preprint at bioRxiv https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.
02.23.581779 (2024).
Nature Biomedical Engineering

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41551-025-01445-1
77. Del Vecchio, A. et al. Interfacing motor units in nonhuman
primates identifies a principal neural component for force control
constrained by the size principle. J. Neurosci. 42, 7386–7399
(2022).
78. Del Vecchio, A. & Farina, D. Interfacing the neural output of the
spinal cord: robust and reliable longitudinal identification of
motor neurons in humans. J. Neural Eng. 17, 016003 (2019).
79. Eden, J. et al. Principles of human movement augmentation
and the challenges in making it a reality. Nat. Commun. 13,
1345 (2022).
80. Kieliba, P., Clode, D., Maimon-Mor, R. O. & Makin, T. R.
Robotic hand augmentation drives changes in neural body
representation. Sci. Robot. 6, eabd7935 (2021).
81. Sawyer, A., Cooke, L., Ramsey, N. F. & Putrino, D. The digital
motor output: a conceptual framework for a meaningful clinical
performance metric for a motor neuroprosthesis. J. Neurointerv.
Surg. 16, 443–446 (2024).
82. Pandarinath, C. et al. Inferring single-trial neural population
dynamics using sequential auto-encoders. Nat. Methods 15,
805–815 (2018).
83. Sani, O. G., Abbaspourazad, H., Wong, Y. T., Pesaran, B. &
Shanechi, M. M. Modeling behaviorally relevant neural dynamics
enabled by preferential subspace identification. Nat. Neurosci. 24,
140–149 (2021).
84. Vyas, S., Golub, M. D., Sussillo, D. & Shenoy, K. Computation
through neural population dynamics. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 43,
249–275 (2020).
85. Formento, E., Botros, P. & Carmena, J. M. Skilled independent
control of individual motor units via a non-invasive
neuromuscular–machine interface. J. Neural Eng. 18, 066019
(2021).
86. Zrenner, C., Desideri, D., Belardinelli, P. & Ziemann, U.
Real-time EEG-defined excitability states determine efficacy of
TMS-induced plasticity in human motor cortex. Brain Stimul. 11,
374–389 (2018).
87. Bergmann, T. O., Karabanov, A., Hartwigsen, G., Thielscher, A. &
Siebner, H. Combining non-invasive transcranial brain stimulation
with neuroimaging and electrophysiology: current approaches
and future perspectives. NeuroImage 140, 4–19 (2016).
88. Brown, K. I., Williams, E. R., de Carvalho, F. & Baker, S. N. Plastic
changes in human motor cortical output induced by random but
not closed-loop peripheral stimulation: the curse of causality.
Front. Hum. Neurosci. 10, 590 (2016).
89. Ibáñez, J. et al. Standard intensities of transcranial alternating
current stimulation over the motor cortex do not entrain
corticospinal inputs to motor neurons. J. Physiol. 601, 3187–3199
(2023).
90. Binder, M. D., Powers, R. K. & Heckman, C. J. Nonlinear
input-output functions of motoneurons. Physiology 35, 31–39
(2020).
91. Williams, E. R. & Baker, S. N. Renshaw cell recurrent inhibition
improves physiological tremor by reducing corticomuscular
coupling at 10 Hz. J. Neurosci. 29, 6616–6624 (2009).
92. Jaiser, S. R., Barnes, J. D., Baker, S. N. & Baker, M. R. A multiple
regression model of normal central and peripheral motor
conduction times. Muscle Nerve 51, 706–712 (2015).

Acknowledgements

This work was partly funded by the EC H2020 grants NIMA
(FETOPEN 899626) and Natural BionicS (ERC Synergy 810346),
UKRI’s EPSRC grant EP/T020970/1 and the BBSRC grant BB/
V00896X/1. J.I. is supported by the European Research Council (ERC)
through the Horizon Europe 2022 Starting Grant programme under
REA grant agreement number 101077693, and by MICIU/AEI and
FEDER, EU (grant PID2022-138585OA-C32).

Perspective

Author contributions

J.I. and D.F. drafted the paper. J.I., B.Z., E.B., S.N.B., C.M. and D.F.
contributed to literature review, conceptualization and editing
of the article.

Competing interests

The authors declare no competing interests.

Additional information

Correspondence should be addressed to Jaime Ibáñez or Dario Farina.
Peer review information Nature Biomedical Engineering thanks
Tamar Makin and the other, anonymous, reviewer(s) for their
contribution to the peer review of this work.

Nature Biomedical Engineering

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41551-025-01445-1
Reprints and permissions information is available at
www.nature.com/reprints.
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Springer Nature or its licensor (e.g. a society or other partner)
holds exclusive rights to this article under a publishing
agreement with the author(s) or other rightsholder(s); author
self-archiving of the accepted manuscript version of this article is
solely governed by the terms of such publishing agreement and
applicable law.
© Springer Nature Limited 2025

