Research article

Modification of spasticity by transcutaneous
spinal cord stimulation in individuals with
incomplete spinal cord injury
Ursula S. Hofstoetter 1 , William B. McKay2, Keith E. Tansey2,3,4, Winfried Mayr 1,
Helmut Kern5,6, Karen Minassian 1
1

Center for Medical Physics and Biomedical Engineering, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria, 2Hulse
Spinal Cord Injury Lab, Crawford Research Institute, Shepherd Center, Atlanta, GA, USA, 3Departments of
Neurology and Physiology, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA, USA, 4Spinal Cord Injury Clinic,
Atlanta Veterans Administration Medical Center, Atlanta, GA, USA, 5Ludwig Boltzmann Institute of Electrical
Stimulation and Physical Rehabilitation, Vienna, Austria, 6Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation,
Wilhelminenspital Wien, Vienna, Austria
Context/objective: To examine the effects of transcutaneous spinal cord stimulation (tSCS) on lower-limb
spasticity.
Design: Interventional pilot study to produce preliminary data.
Setting: Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Wilhelminenspital, Vienna, Austria.
Participants: Three subjects with chronic motor-incomplete spinal cord injury (SCI) who could walk ≥10 m.
Interventions: Two interconnected stimulating skin electrodes (Ø 5 cm) were placed paraspinally at the T11/T12
vertebral levels, and two rectangular electrodes (8 × 13 cm) on the abdomen for the reference. Biphasic 2 mswidth pulses were delivered at 50 Hz for 30 minutes at intensities producing paraesthesias but no motor
responses in the lower limbs.
Outcome measures: The Wartenberg pendulum test and neurological recordings of surface-electromyography
(EMG) were used to assess effects on exaggerated reflex excitability. Non-functional co-activation during
volitional movement was evaluated. The timed 10-m walk test provided measures of clinical function.
Results: The index of spasticity derived from the pendulum test changed from 0.8 ± 0.4 pre- to 0.9 ± 0.3 poststimulation, with an improvement in the subject with the lowest pre-stimulation index. Exaggerated reflex
responsiveness was decreased after tSCS across all subjects, with the most profound effect on passive
lower-limb movement (pre- to post-tSCS EMG ratio: 0.2 ± 0.1), as was non-functional co-activation during
voluntary movement. Gait speed values increased in two subjects by 39%.
Conclusion: These preliminary results suggest that tSCS, similar to epidurally delivered stimulation, may be used
for spasticity control, without negatively impacting residual motor control in incomplete SCI. Further study in a
larger population is warranted.
Keywords: Humans, Movement, Muscle spasticity, Spinal cord injuries, Spinal cord stimulation, Paraplegia, Tetraplegia, Rehabilitation

Introduction
Partial injury of descending spinal cord tracts alters the
supraspinal motor control over the lumbosacral neural
circuitry that is normally preserved caudal to the
lesion. The consequences of such injuries are usually
paresis or paralysis and spasticity of the lower

Correspondence to: Ursula S. Hofstoetter, Center for Medical Physics and
Biomedical Engineering, Medical University of Vienna, Waehringer Guertel
18-20/4L, A-1090 Vienna, Austria. Email: ursula.hofstoetter@meduniwien.ac.at

202

© The Academy of Spinal Cord Injury Professionals, Inc. 2014
DOI 10.1179/2045772313Y.0000000149

extremities.1,2 Also, when present, spasticity can negatively impact otherwise sufficient residual motor
control.3,4
Treatment modalities used for spasticity target
the segmental pathophysiological changes within the
spinal cord after the injury as well as changes in the
muscle–tendon complex.5 They range from oral medication and physical interventions to motor nerve block
injections and intrathecal drug delivery.5,6 Yet, therapeutic control of severe forms of spasticity, while

The Journal of Spinal Cord Medicine

2014

VOL. 37

NO. 2

Hofstoetter et al.

maintaining or even enhancing residual motor
capacities, has remained difficult.7 Surgical treatment
of spasticity is based on the concept that spinal reflex
circuitry becomes hyperactive after being deprived of
supraspinal inhibitory control. By cutting the posterior
roots, Otfrid Foerster, in 1909, interrupted afferent
inputs to the spinal cord to reduce the excitability of segmental neural circuits.8 More selective posterior root
entry zone procedures were developed to decrease
lower limb hypertonia and improve ambulation.9
However, such surgical approaches create permanent
lesions within the neural tissue and have the potential
to damage surviving neural function and a high incidence of recurrence of spasticity has been reported.10
The emergence of epidurally delivered electrical
spinal cord stimulation (SCS) provided an alternative
way to reversibly modify motor control in patients
with upper motor neuron disorders.11–15 Richardson
and McLone16 and Richardson et al. 17 described the
alleviation of severe lower limb spasticity in clinically
complete thoracic spinal cord injury (SCI) by epidural
stimulation applied over the lumbosacral spinal cord
and cauda equina. In patients with motor-complete
and incomplete SCI, epidural SCS was applied below
and above the lesion at vertebral levels ranging from
C2 to T10 and at stimulation frequencies of
30–1500 Hz, with variable results.18–22 Dimitrijevic
et al. 23,24 suggested that the diversity of physiological
conditions after SCI and the placement of the epidural
electrodes determined the efficacy of SCS in spasticity
control. While interest in this technique declined in the
1990s, Pinter et al. 25 revisited its use in individuals
with chronic SCI. They showed a significant suppression
of severe lower limb spasticity when the epidural electrodes were placed over the lumbar posterior roots and the
stimulation frequency was in a range of 50–100 Hz. The
suggested mechanism was the modification of the excitability of neural circuits within the lumbar spinal cord
through continuous posterior-root activation.25–27
We previously described a transcutaneous stimulation
method to depolarize large-diameter afferent fibers of

Table 1

Modification of tSCS on lower-limb spasticity

the L2–S2 posterior roots in humans.28–30 These input
structures to the segmental neural circuits are hence (at
least a sub-population of ) the same neural targets as
electrically stimulated by epidural implants over the
lumbar spinal cord.22,30 In this exploratory work, we
hypothesized that transcutaneous SCS (tSCS), when
applied in a continuous mode at 50 Hz, can be used to
modify the central state of excitability of lumbar
neural circuits, and reduce spasticity.

Methods
Subjects and clinical data
After informed consent was obtained, three subjects
(mean age 32.7 ± 4.1 years; one female) with chronic
(10.7 ± 1.2 years post-onset) sensory- and motor-incomplete SCI were studied (Table 1). The participants were
otherwise healthy adults. All subjects had spastic muscle
hypertonia in the lower limbs and exhibited clonus but
were able to complete the 10-m walk test without
braces and were not taking anti-spasticity medications.
The study was approved by the Ethics Committee of
the City of Vienna, Austria, and conforms to the
Helsinki Declaration of 1975, as revised in 2000.

Transcutaneous spinal cord stimulation
tSCS was applied using self-adhesive electrodes (Schwamedico GmbH, Ehringshausen, Germany). A pair of
stimulating disk electrodes (Ø = 5 cm) was placed over
the T11 and T12 spinous processes, manually identified
by palpation, with one electrode on either side of the
spine (Fig. 1A). A pair of rectangular reference electrodes (8 cm × 13 cm each) was placed over the lower
anterior abdomen, in symmetry to the umbilicus. The
two electrodes of each pair were connected together so
as to function as single, larger electrodes. A constantvoltage stimulator delivered charge-balanced, symmetric, biphasic rectangular pulses of 2 ms width (1 ms
per phase). Electrode placement was confirmed by eliciting posterior root-muscle reflexes (PRM reflexes) in
lower limb muscles with the subjects relaxed in the
supine position (Fig. 1B).29–31 The requirement was

Subject characteristics
Lower limb
motor scores

Subject no.

Sex

Age

Years post-injury

Level of SCI

AIS

Left

Right

WISCI

Device

1
2
3

M
M
F

38
32
28

9
12
11

C5
C5
T9

D
D
D

13
12
11

12
17
13

13
16
16

Walker
Crutches
Crutches

ASIA Impairment Scale (AIS) category, Walking Index for Spinal Cord Injury (WISCI), assistive devices needed for gait (Device).
M, male; F, female.

The Journal of Spinal Cord Medicine

2014

VOL. 37

NO. 2

203

Hofstoetter et al.

Modification of tSCS on lower-limb spasticity

Figure 1 Transcutaneous spinal cord stimulation. (A) Sketch of the placement of the stimulating and reference skin electrodes over
the back and the lower abdomen, respectively, relative to the spine and the lumbosacral spinal cord. (B) The elicitation of posterior
root-muscle reflexes in left (L) and right (R) quadriceps (Q), hamstrings (Ham), tibialis anterior (TA), and triceps surae (TS) was used
as electrophysiological criterion to confirm the position of the stimulating paravertebral electrodes over the lumbar spinal cord.
(C) The stimulation of posterior root afferents was verified by testing the recovery cycle of the evoked responses using doublestimuli at interstimulus intervals of 30, 50, and 100 ms. Electromyographic data derived from subject 2 in the supine position.

that single stimuli evoke PRM reflexes in the L2–L4
innervated quadriceps (Q) at lower thresholds than
in the L5–S2 innervated triceps surae (TS).25,26,32
Paraspinal electrodes were relocated, up to 3 cm in
either the rostral or caudal direction when needed to
achieve this required PRM response distribution.
Double-stimuli at interstimulus intervals of 30, 50, and
100 ms were applied to test the presence of post-stimulation attenuation of the detected responses to verify
the stimulation of afferent fibers (Fig. 1C).29,33
To induce the hypothesized neuromodulative effect
on lumbar spinal neural circuits, tSCS was applied at
a frequency of 50 Hz.25 With the subject lying comfortably supine on an examination bed, the stimulation intensity was slowly increased starting from 0 V to allow for
adaptation to the stimulation-induced effects. These
effects included, in sequence of their occurrence with
increasing stimulation: sensory perception of the stimulation under the paraspinal and subsequently the
abdominal electrodes, contraction of the paraspinal
and abdominal muscles, and paraesthesias in the lower
limbs. tSCS was applied for 30 minutes at intensities
producing paraesthesias in most of the lower limb dermatomes, yet subthreshold for generating lower limb

204

The Journal of Spinal Cord Medicine

2014

VOL. 37

NO. 2

motor activity. Particularly, the average intensity
applied amounted to 20 V ± 2 V ( per phase of the
biphasic stimulation pulse), corresponding to 68% ±
16% of individual lower limb PRM reflex threshold.19,24
Discomfort during the stimulation was not reported by
any subject.

Assessments
All assessments were performed prior to and immediately following the 30-minute session of 50-Hz tSCS.
The Wartenberg pendulum test (WPT) is a quantitative method for the assessment of spastic hypertonia of
the Q muscle.34 With the subject in a sitting position,
reclined at approximately 45°, the examiner lifted the
relaxed test limb to a horizontal position, then released
it and let it oscillate passively until it stopped in a
gravity-neutral position. The test was repeated three
times on each side.
Electromyographic (EMG) recordings from Q, hamstrings (Ham), tibialis anterior (TA), and TS muscles
bilaterally were acquired using pairs of silver–silver
chloride recording electrodes (Intec Medizintechnik
GmbH, Klagenfurt, Austria), each placed centrally
over the muscle bellies and oriented along the long

Hofstoetter et al.

axis of the muscles with an inter-electrode distance of
3 cm.35 Inter-electrode impedance was reduced to
below 5 kΩ using abrasive paste. EMG signals were
amplified (EMS-Handels GmbH, Korneuburg,
Austria) with a gain of 502, filtered to a bandwidth of
10–500 Hz and digitized at 2048 samples per second
per channel. Electro-goniometers (Penny & Giles
Biometrics, Ltd., Gwent, UK) were used to measure
knee and ankle movements. The goniometric data
were synchronized to the EMG, bandpass-filtered
between 0 and 100 Hz and sampled at 2048 Hz.
Reflex activities and motor tasks tested included, in
the supine position, passive unilateral hip and knee
flexion and extension movements, the manual elicitation
of ankle clonus by rapid stretch of the Achilles tendon,
and foot withdrawal by non-noxious mechanical
plantar stimulation. Each of the maneuvers was
repeated three times on each side, separated by phases
of relaxation. In the sitting position, rhythmic voluntary
unilateral ankle dorsiflexion and plantar flexion
attempted at a self-selected speed was performed five
times on each side.
The 10-m walking speed was acquired with subjects
using walking aids (Table 1) as required for safety.36
Each test was videotaped for offline visual examination.
In subjects 1 and 2, all segments of the assessment
were completed in a single recording session. In
subject 3, passive lower limb movements and plantar
stimulation were performed in one session, and ankle
clonus, volitional ankle movement, and the timed
10-m walk test were accomplished in a second session.
The WPT was repeated in both sessions, and the respective measures were averaged, hence contributing single
values per leg to the group results.

Data analysis
Data were analyzed offline using WinDaq Waveform
Browser playback software (DATAQ Instruments,
Inc., Akron, OH, USA) and Matlab R2012a (The
MathWorks, Inc., Natick, MA, USA).
Wartenberg pendulum test
The index of spasticity, R2n, was calculated as described
by Bajd and Vodovnik37:
(peak knee flexion angle of first swing)
− (starting knee angle)
R2n =
1.6[(finalrestingkneeangle)
−(starting knee angle)]
Scores ≥1 signify non-spastic conditions, while R2n = 0
is obtained in case of extreme spasticity. The index correlates well with the clinical evaluation of muscle

Modification of tSCS on lower-limb spasticity

hypertonia graded on the Ashworth scale, and provides
a more objective and finely graded measurement.38
Here, mean R2n values were averaged over the three repetitions on each side.
In addition, the magnitude of total ipsilateral lower
limb EMG activity generated during the pendulum
test was calculated as the sum of the root mean square
(RMS) of the EMG activity across the four ipsilateral
muscle groups, between the onset of the maneuver,
drop of leg from horizontal position, and the time
when the resting angle was reached. Data for each
muscle were baseline-corrected by subtracting the
RMS calculated from a 1-second period preceding the
maneuver. Mean values of the three repetitions for
each limb were evaluated. The corresponding value
after tSCS was then individually normalized to the
value before stimulation and normalized mean group
results Ātotal of these ratios (derived from n = 6 lower
limbs) were calculated.
Volitional ankle dorsiflexion and plantar flexion
The total maneuver-related magnitudes of ipsilateral
muscle activation during five consecutive flexion and
extension phases (identified by ankle goniometric
data) were calculated based on the RMS values as
described above and averaged. Agonist muscle activity
during each movement phase was normalized to the
total activity recorded across all ipsilateral muscles.
Thus, the amount of TA activity (RMSTA) relative to
the total magnitude of ipsilateral muscle activation
(RMStotal ) during dorsiflexion was individually calculated as RMSTA/RMStotal, and group results were
obtained across the subjects. Accordingly, the relative
TS activity during plantar flexion was computed as
RMSTS/RMStotal. Mean peak angles of the ankle
movement for the five repetitions were also obtained.
Passive lower limb flexion-extension, ankle clonus,
and plantar stimulation
In case of passive lower limb flexion and extension
movements, base-line corrected RMS from ipsilateral
muscles were calculated between the onsets and offsets
plus 3 seconds for the movement identified by knee
goniometric data. For ankle clonus and plantar stimulation, RMS of ipsilateral lower limb EMG activity
was computed for 5-second time windows following
the initiation of the maneuvers. Mean values for the
maneuver-related magnitude of ipsilateral muscle activation were obtained from the three repetitions of each
task, and normalized group mean results Ātotal were calculated from the available data sets.

The Journal of Spinal Cord Medicine

2014

VOL. 37

NO. 2

205

Hofstoetter et al.

Modification of tSCS on lower-limb spasticity

10-m walk test
The time required to walk a distance of 10 m before and
after stimulation with the same walking aids was
measured.

Results
Pendulum test
The average spasticity index R2n was 0.8 ± 0.4 before
and 0.9 ± 0.3 after tSCS. The group result Ātotal of the
magnitude of ipsilateral muscle activation after stimulation normalized to the corresponding value before
stimulation was 0.9 ± 0.0. The EMG activities produced
during the WPT were decreased evenly across all subjects after stimulation, while the R2n score improved in
subject 3 only, who had the lowest pre-stimulation
scores, with no changes in the R2n in subjects 1 and
2. The R2n scores obtained in subject 3 in the two sessions were reproducible for both lower limbs and the
pre- and post-tSCS assessments, respectively. Before
stimulation, the pendulum test documented restraints
in the free-swinging movements of the lower leg in
subject 3 (Fig. 2, left). The passive, gravity-driven movement toward the gravity-neutral end-point position was
interrupted by numerous short bursts of stretch-elicited
Q activity, accompanied by activation of Ham and, to
some extent, of TA. After stimulation, activation of
the Q only occurred during the initial two flexion–extension oscillations of the leg and the knee movements were
a pseudo-sinusoidal, damped motion (Fig. 2, right).

Effects of tSCS on exaggerated reflex responses
Passive hip and knee flexion and extension movements
(Fig. 3A) before tSCS induced responses with a spread
of EMG activity to all ipsilateral lower limb muscles.
These responses were almost completely absent in the
post-tSCS assessment. Pre-tSCS, a brisk manual

stretch of the calf muscle elicited clonus-like activity in
TS that spread to Ham and TA in the example given
in Fig. 3B. After tSCS, no muscle activities except for
a brief stretch-related reflex response in TS were detected
when the same maneuver was performed. Non-noxious,
cutaneous stimulation to the plantar surface of the foot
with a blunt probe (Fig. 3C) resulted in withdrawalreflex EMG activity in all ipsilateral lower limb
muscles but after tSCS, was largely diminished.
The general decline in exaggerated reflex activities
was reflected by the group results Ātotal of the maneuver-related magnitudes of ipsilateral lower limb EMG
activity obtained for the post-tSCS assessment normalized to the corresponding values before tSCS
(Fig. 3D). The post-tSCS RMS values were considerably reduced across all maneuvers and lower limbs,
with the exception of the values derived from the
ankle clonus tested in the respective left lower limbs of
subjects 1 and 3. Specifically, Ātotal amounted to:
passive lower limb movement, 0.2 ± 0.1; ankle clonus,
0.7 ± 0.3; and plantar stimulation, 0.4 ± 0.1.

Effects of tSCS on voluntary movements
The EMG activity during volitional ankle dorsiflexion
and plantar flexion performed before stimulation was
generally characterized by co-activation patterns in the
TA and TS muscles during both phases of movement
(Fig. 4A, left). After stimulation, this co-activation
was decreased (Fig. 4A, right). Furthermore, active
range of motion for dorsiflexion was increased. The
mean total range of ankle movement of the different
subjects was increased after stimulation by a factor of
1.2 ± 0.1. In addition, clonus-like activity in TA and
TS that occurred in subjects 1 and 2 during the
execution of the voluntary motor task was eliminated
after tSCS (Fig. 4A and B).

Figure 2 Wartenberg pendulum test. Electromyographic (EMG) activity from quadriceps (Q), hamstrings (Ham), tibialis anterior (TA),
and triceps surae (TS) along with knee goniometric data before and after transcutaneous spinal cord stimulation in subject 3. Dotted
lines mark the drop of leg from the horizontal position and the final resting knee angle reached. After stimulation, EMG activity is
clearly reduced and the knee angle oscillations are a damped, pseudo-sinusoidal motion.

206

The Journal of Spinal Cord Medicine

2014

VOL. 37

NO. 2

Hofstoetter et al.

Modification of tSCS on lower-limb spasticity

Figure 3 Assessment of different manifestations of spasticity before and after transcutaneous spinal cord stimulation (tSCS).
(A) Manually performed hip and knee flexion and extension movements; (B) the attempt to elicit an ankle clonus; and (C) a light stroke
of the plantar surface with a blunt rod. Arrow heads in (B) and (C) depict onsets of the respective mechanical stimuli. Exemplary
recordings were derived from subject 2. (D) Group results (n = 6) of maneuver-induced magnitudes of ipsilateral lower limb muscle
activity after tSCS relative to corresponding values before tSCS. Note the general decline in exaggerated reflex activity in the
post-tSCS assessment.

Group results (Fig. 4C) revealed that the magnitude
of ipsilateral EMG activity during dorsiflexion
remained almost unchanged compared to that from
before stimulation (Ātotal = 0.9 ± 0.4). Yet, a more selective activation of the ankle flexor TA during dorsiflexion
was observed in the post-tSCS assessment, as reflected
by the group mean results of RMSTA/RMStotal (0.6 ±
0.1 before stimulation and 0.8 ± 0.2 afterwards;
Fig. 4D, left). During plantar flexion, the magnitude
of ipsilateral EMG activity was reduced after stimulation (Ātotal = 0.5 ± 0.2). There was no increase in
selectivity in agonist muscle activation, with the relative
TS activity RMSTS/RMStotal remaining at a low level
(0.3 ± 0.2 before and 0.2 ± 0.2 after stimulation;
Fig. 4D, right).

and 54 vs. 32 seconds for subject 2. Clonus-like activity
interfering with the subjects’ ability to walk before
stimulation was visibly reduced after stimulation in
these two subjects. Subject 3 had the fastest 10-m time
prior to stimulation and did not show any increase
after stimulation (23 vs. 23.5 seconds).

Subjects’ reports
Apart from the anti-spastic effect, the participants
described a feeling of lightness of the lower limbs, and
increased sensation, especially of the foot sole during
ground contact. The anti-spastic effects were subjectively reported to have persisted for 2–6 hours after
tSCS. No negative effects were reported.

Discussion
Effects of tSCS on the walking ability
Two of the three participants increased their overground walking speed after stimulation. Times required
to walk 10 m at a self-selected fast, yet secure speed were
54 before and 34 seconds after stimulation for subject 1,

We described the effects of a 30-minute session of 50-Hz
transcutaneous lumbar SCS in three motor-incomplete
SCI subjects with clinically evident spasticity. We
observed that the responsiveness to muscle stretch,
both tonic and phasic was decreased, as was the

The Journal of Spinal Cord Medicine

2014

VOL. 37

NO. 2

207

Hofstoetter et al.

Modification of tSCS on lower-limb spasticity

Figure 4 Volitional unilateral dorsiflexion and plantar flexion in sitting position. (A) EMG patterns showing co-activation and ankle
clonus (left) are reduced post-stimulation (right). Dashed lines superimposed on the ankle goniograms show the range between the
neutral extended position of the ankle at rest and maximum dorsiflexion before stimulation, and a flexion bias of the rhythmic
movement after stimulation is documented by the shift of the goniometric trace. Boxes are displayed with enlarged scales in (B)
depicting the interference of clonus-like activity before stimulation that is eliminated after stimulation. (C) Group mean magnitudes
of ipsilateral EMG activity during dorsiflexion and plantar flexion after stimulation normalized to the corresponding values before
stimulation. (D) The contribution of TA to the total magnitude of ipsilateral muscle activation during dorsiflexion was increased after
stimulation. TS activity during plantar flexion was at a low level before and after stimulation.

response to non-noxious, cutaneous stimulation of the
plantar surface of the foot. Also, TA was more selectively activated during volitional dorsiflexion movements after tSCS. Finally, two of the three subjects
increased their walking speeds considerably after tSCS.
To understand these observations, we must first look
to the neuroanatomy stimulated by tSCS. The electrode
set-up and stimulation frequency of tSCS resemble that
of transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS).
However, clinical TENS therapies normally excite
more superficially located neural structures, and the
major application is in the treatment of localized pain
conditions. On the other hand, tSCS targets deeply
located neural structures within the vertebral canal
with the aim to provide bilateral multi-segmental input
to the spinal cord and subsequently modify the excitability of its circuits.22 Within the vertebral canal, large
diameter afferent fibers of the L2–S2 posterior rootlets

208

The Journal of Spinal Cord Medicine

2014

VOL. 37

NO. 2

to spinal cord junctions have the lowest thresholds for
direct, electrical depolarization.29 The ligaments and
discs between the vertebral bones reduce the transverse
electrical resistance of the thoraco-lumbar spine and
allow some current to flow through the vertebral
canal.30,39,40 The excitation thresholds for the posterior
root fibers are considerably reduced at their point of
entry into the spinal cord due to non-uniformities of
the anatomy and its electrical conductivities along the
fiber paths and changes of the fiber path direction with
respect to the generated field.30,39,40 Among the fibers
within the posterior roots, the Ia afferents have the
largest fiber diameters. It is known that the Ia afferents,
presumably among the fibers depolarized during tSCS,
make strong synaptic connections to Ia inhibitory interneurons.41 Independently, there is indirect evidence in
humans that epidural SCS can activate spinal circuitries
mediating reciprocal inhibition.32,42 Reciprocal

Hofstoetter et al.

inhibition might be one of the mechanisms sub-serving
an inhibitory plurisegmental network situated within
the lumbar spinal cord that was thought to be involved
in the amelioration of severe lower-limb spasticity in a
group of clinically complete mid-thoracic SCI people
when epidural electrodes were placed over the lumbar
posterior roots.25
Another potential source of the effects observed here
can be drawn from the reports that stimulation of the
long tracts of the spinal cord reduces responsiveness to
muscle spindle afferent input after spinal cord lesioning
in cat models and SCI in humans.23,24,43,44 Here, we
applied tSCS with adequate intensity to produce paraesthesias that are generally associated with posteriorcolumn depolarization during epidural SCS.45–47
Modeling of tSCS-induced currents, however, has
shown that posterior column fibers have considerably
higher thresholds than the posterior root fibers.40
Thus, at the intensities applied here, tSCS was probably
not depolarizing long-tract fibers directly. Posterior
roots contain fibers from cutaneous mechanoreceptors
and their depolarization can also produce such sensations.48 Therefore, the report of parasthesias experienced here and the incomplete nature of the lesions in
this study support the possibility that long loop, spinal–
brainstem–spinal mechanisms might be involved in the
suppression of segmental excitability.23 Such combined
posterior roots activation and increased descending inhibition via brainstem loops in the control of spinal spasticity was suggested by other human studies.17,23,25,49
Therefore, the most likely explanation for the effects
seen in the three subjects reported here is a combination
of both direct activation of local inhibitory circuits by
posterior root fibers and the potentially more complex
involvement of descending activation of presynaptic
inhibition brought by long-loop mechanisms. This
would also explain the observed reduction in the excessive withdrawal-like response elicited by non-noxious
stimulation of the plantar surface of the foot, interpreted
as a sign of decreased descending inhibitory control and
altered intraspinal processing due to SCI.50 Finally, a
generalized reduction of motor outputs by post-synaptic
inhibition only is less probable since there was no
deterioration of the voluntary activation of motor
neuron pools during single ankle joint movements and
walking. The improvements in the 10-m walk test in
two of the three incomplete SCI participants after
tSCS were partially attributable to the reduced clonuslike activity interfering with gait. The influence of a
practice effect was less probable since the increase in
gait speed of the two subjects was definitely beyond
the normal variability of the subjects’ condition.

Modification of tSCS on lower-limb spasticity

To what extent the above-discussed mechanisms contribute to the temporarily persisting modifications of the
spinal cord neural circuits’ excitability as assessed after
tSCS was ended remains to be elucidated. Yet, this
carry-over effect and its subjectively reported persistence
for 2 to several hours after cessation of stimulation were
not unexpected. In epidural SCS in motor disorders, it
was repetitively observed that degradation of the
improved function after withdrawal of stimulation
could take hours or days.13,19,23,24 Temporary carryover effects were also described in functional electrical
stimulation of peripheral nerves.51–53 However, proposed physiological mechanisms underlying these
carry-over effects are speculative and include activitydependent, temporarily persisting changes of synaptic
transmission such as long-term potentiation and longterm depression behavior of spinal motor neurons.54
The results were derived from few individuals and
thus, generalization to a population with a variety of
SCI profiles should be cautioned.55 Further, the
obvious sensory effects of the active stimulation limits
the applicability of more conclusive study designs such
as crossover studies with sham stimulation. Yet, we conducted thorough and quantitative assessment of many
parameters of a highly integrative sensory-motor
system.55 The antispastic effect of tSCS was apparent
from complementary biomechanical, neurophysiological, and clinical evaluations and there were no discrepancies in the modifications across the parameters
after stimulation. The promising results justify a clinical
study with a statistically appropriate subject population
with different severities of SCI. The close investigation
of the carry-over effects as well as methods for prolonging this beneficial period, e.g. by several sessions of tSCS
over a longer period of time, should be also addressed.

Conclusion
Independent from the specific mechanisms, the present
results suggest that 50-Hz tSCS for 30 minutes leads to
the diminution of pathophysiology (spasticity) and the
improvement of normal physiology (voluntary motor
control). If shown to be of wide prevalence, it is possible
that this therapeutic approach could be used instead of
systemically applied medications or ablative treatments
with their unfortunate and long-lasting side effects.
The temporary relief of spasticity with tSCS could be
a non-invasive treatment of use for even short periods,
perhaps prior to a physical therapy session where
decreased co-contractions and dyssynergias and
improved voluntary control could be better trained.
Thus, this report serves as evidence that more study
designed to characterize the extent and potential

The Journal of Spinal Cord Medicine

2014

VOL. 37

NO. 2

209

Hofstoetter et al.

Modification of tSCS on lower-limb spasticity

mechanisms of tSCS effect on motor neuron excitability
is needed. Taken together, these results suggest that
tSCS may be able to modify spinal motor responsiveness
to external inputs from muscle, tendon, joint and
cutaneous receptors while maintaining its responsiveness to input from spinal motor processing generated
from within the CNS.

Acknowledgments
Special thanks to Milan R. Dimitrijevic, Department of
Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Baylor College of
Medicine, Houston, TX, USA, and Foundation for
Movement Recovery, Oslo, Norway. We wish to
acknowledge the support of the Austrian Science Fund
(FWF), Proj.Nr. L512-N13, the Vienna Science and
Technology Fund (WWTF), Proj.Nr. LS11-057, and
the Wings for Life Spinal Cord Research Foundation
(WfL), Proj.Nr. WFL-AT-007/11.

References
1 Sheean G. The pathophysiology of spasticity. Eur J Neurol 2002;
9(S1):3–9.
2 Biering-Sørensen F, Nielsen JB, Klinge K. Spasticity-assessment: a
review. Spinal Cord 2006;44(12):708–22.
3 Krawetz P, Nance P. Gait analysis of spinal cord injured subjects:
effects of injury level and spasticity. Arch Phys Med Rehabil 1996;
77(7):635–8.
4 Adams MM, Hicks AL. Spasticity after spinal cord injury. Spinal
Cord 2005;43(10):577–86.
5 Tansey K, Dimitrijevic MM, Mayr W, Bijak M, Dimitrijevic MR.
Restorative neurology of motor control after spinal cord injury. In:
Dimitrijevic MR, Byron A, Vrbova G, McKay WB, (eds.)
Restorative neurology of spinal cord injury. New York: Oxford
University Press; 2011. p. 43–64.
6 Elbasiouny SM, Moroz D, Bakr MM, Mushahwar VK.
Management of spasticity after spinal cord injury: current techniques and future directions. Neurorehabil Neural Repair 2010;
24(1):23–33.
7 Smyth MD, Peacock WJ. The surgical treatment of spasticity.
Muscle Nerve 2000;23(2):153–63.
8 Foerster O. Über eine neue operative Methode der Behandlung
spastischer
Lähmung
mittels
Resektion
hinterer
Rückenmarkswurzeln. Z Orthop Chir 1909;22:203–22.
9 Nielsen JB, Crone C, Hultborn H. The spinal pathophysiology of
spasticity – from a basic science point of view. Acta Physiol (Oxf )
2007;189(2):171–80.
10 Sindou M, Pregelj R, Boisson D, Eyssette M, Goutelle A. Surgical
selective lesions of nerve fibers and myelotomies for modifying
muscle hypertonia. In: Eccles J, Dimitrijevic MR, (eds.) Upper
motor neuron functions and dysfunctions. Recent achievements in
restorative neurology, Vol. 1. Basel: S Karger AG; 1985. p. 10–26.
11 Shealy CN, Mortimer JT, Reswick JB. Electrical inhibition of pain
by stimulation of the dorsal columns: preliminary clinical report.
Anesth Analg 1967;46(4):489–91.
12 Cook AW, Weinstein SP. Chronic dorsal column stimulation in
multiple sclerosis. Preliminary report. N Y State J Med 1973;
73(24):2868–72.
13 Cook AW. Electrical stimulation in multiple sclerosis. Hosp Pract
1976;11(4):51–8.
14 Dooley DM. Percutaneous electrical stimulation of the spinal cord.
43rd Annual Meeting of the American Association of Neurological
Surgeons. Miami Beach, Florida, April 1975.
15 Illis LS, Oygar AE, Sedgwick EM, Awadalla MA. Dorsal-column
stimulation in the rehabilitation of patients with multiple sclerosis.
Lancet 1976;1(7974):1383–6.

210

The Journal of Spinal Cord Medicine

2014

VOL. 37

NO. 2

16 Richardson RR, McLone DG. Percutaneous epidural neurostimulation for paraplegic spasticity. Surg Neurol 1978;9(3):153–5.
17 Richardson RR, Cerullo LJ, McLone DG, Gutierrez FA, Lewis V.
Percutaneous epidural neurostimulation in modulation of paraplegic spasticity. Six case reports. Acta Neurochir 1979;49(3–4):
235–43.
18 Siegfried J, Lazorthes Y, Broggi G. Electrical spinal cord stimulation for spastic movement disorders. Appl Neurophysiol 1981;
44(1-3):77–92.
19 Barolat G, Myklebust JB, Wenninger W. Effects of spinal cord
stimulation on spasticity and spasms secondary to myelopathy.
Appl Neurophysiol 1988;51(1):29–44.
20 Barolat G, Singh-Sahni K, Staas WE, Shatin D, Ketcik B, Allen K.
Epidural spinal cord stimulation in the management of spasms in
spinal cord injury: a prospective study. Stereotact Funct
Neurosurg 1995;64(3):153–64.
21 Waltz JM. Chronic stimulation for motor disorders. In: Gindelberg
PL, Tasker RR, (eds.) Textbook for stereotactic and functional
neurosurgery. New York: McGraw-Hill; 1998. p. 1087–99.
22 Minassian K, Hofstoetter U, Tansey K, Mayr W.
Neuromodulation of lower limb motor control in restorative neurology. Clin Neurol Neurosurg 2012;114(5):489–97.
23 Dimitrijevic MM, Dimitrijevic MR, Illis LS, Nakajima K,
Sharkey PC, Sherwood AM. Spinal cord stimulation for the
control of spasticity in patients with chronic spinal cord injury:
I. Clinical observations. Cent Nerv Syst Trauma 1986;3(2):129–44.
24 Dimitrijevic MR, Illis LS, Nakajima K, Sharkey PC, Sherwood
AM. Spinal cord stimulation for the control of spasticity in patients
with chronic spinal cord injury: II. Neurophysiologic observations.
Cent Nerv Syst Trauma 1986;3(2):145–52.
25 Pinter MM, Gerstenbrand F, Dimitrijevic MR. Epidural electrical
stimulation of posterior structures of the human lumbosacral cord:
3. Control of spasticity. Spinal Cord 2000;38(9):524–31.
26 Murg M, Binder H, Dimitrijevic MR. Epidural electric stimulation
of posterior structures of the human lumbar spinal cord: 1. muscle
twitches – a functional method to define the site of stimulation.
Spinal Cord 2000;38(7):394–402.
27 Rattay F, Minassian K, Dimitrijevic MR. Epidural electrical
stimulation of posterior structures of the human lumbosacral
cord: 2. quantitative analysis by computer modeling. Spinal
Cord 2000;38(8):473–89.
28 Dimitrijevic MR, Dimitrijevic MM, Kern H, Minassian K, Rattay
F. Electrophysiological characteristics of H-reflexes elicited by percutaneous stimulation of the cauda equina. Program No. 417.11.
Abstract viewer/itinerary planner. Washington, DC: Society for
Neuroscience; 2004.
29 Minassian K, Persy I, Rattay F, Dimitrijevic MR, Hofer C, Kern
H. Posterior root-muscle reflexes elicited by transcutaneous stimulation of the human lumbosacral cord. Muscle Nerve 2007;35(3):
327–36.
30 Minassian K, Hofstoetter U, Rattay F. Transcutaneous lumbar
posterior root stimulation for motor control studies and modification of motor activity after spinal cord injury. In: Dimitrijevic
MR, Byron A, Vrbova G, McKay WB, (eds.) Restorative neurology of spinal cord injury. New York: Oxford University Press;
2011. p. 226–55.
31 Hofstoetter US, Minassian K, Hofer C, Mayr W, Rattay F,
Dimitrijevic MR. Modification of reflex responses to lumbar posterior root stimulation by motor tasks in healthy subjects. Artif
Organs 2008;32(8):644–8.
32 Minassian K, Persy I, Rattay F, Pinter MM, Kern H, Dimitrijevic
MR. Human lumbar cord circuitries can be activated by extrinsic
tonic input to generate locomotor-like activity. Hum Mov Sci 2007;
26(2):275–95.
33 Roy FD, Gibson G, Stein RB. Effect of percutaneous stimulation
at different spinal levels on the activation of sensory and motor
roots. Exp Brain Res 2012;223(2):281–9.
34 Wartenberg R. Pendulousness of the legs as a diagnostic test.
Neurology 1951;1(1):18–24.
35 Sherwood AM, McKay WB, Dimitrijević MR. Motor control
after spinal cord injury: assessment using surface EMG. Muscle
Nerve 1996;19(8):966–79.
36 Scivoletto G, Tamburella F, Laurenza L, Foti C, Ditunno JF,
Molinari M. Validity and reliability of the 10-m walk test and

Hofstoetter et al.

the 6-min walk test in spinal cord injury patients. Spinal Cord
2011;49(6):736–40.
37 Bajd T, Vodovnik L. Pendulum testing of spasticity. J Biomed Eng
1984;6(1):9–16.
38 Leslie GC, Muir C, Part NJ, Roberts RC. A comparison of the
assessment of spasticity by the Wartenberg pendulum test and
the Ashworth grading scale in patients with multiple sclerosis.
Clin Rehabil 1992;6(1):41–8.
39 Ladenbauer J, Minassian K, Hofstoetter US, Dimitrijevic MR,
Rattay F. Stimulation of the human lumbar spinal cord with
implanted and surface electrodes: a computer simulation study.
IEEE Trans Neural Syst Rehabil Eng 2010;18(6):637–45.
40 Danner SM, Hofstoetter US, Ladenbauer J, Rattay F, Minassian
M. Can the human lumbar posterior columns be stimulated by
transcutaneous spinal cord stimulation? A modeling study. Artif
Organs 2011;35(3):257–62.
41 Jankowska E. Interneuronal relay in spinal pathways from proprioceptors. Prog Neurobiol 1992;38(4):335–78.
42 Hofstoetter US. Model of spinal cord reflex circuits in humans: stimulation frequency-dependence of segmental activities and their interactions [PhD dissertation]. Vienna University of Technology, 2009.
43 Chapman CE, Ruegg DG, Wiesendanger M. Effects of dorsal cord
stimulation on stretch reflexes. Brain Res 1983;258(2):211–5.
44 Siegfried J, Krainick JU, Haas H, Adorjani C, Meyer M, Thoden
U. Electrical spinal cord stimulation for spastic movement disorders. Appl Neurophysiol 1978;41(1-4):134–41.
45 Barolat G, Massaro F, He J, Zeme S, Ketcik B. Mapping of
sensory responses to epidural stimulation of the intraspinal
neural structures in man. J Neurosurg 1993;78(2):233–9.

Modification of tSCS on lower-limb spasticity

46 Holsheimer J. Computer modelling of spinal cord stimulation and
its contribution to therapeutic efficacy. Spinal Cord 1998;36(8):
531–40.
47 Holsheimer J. Which neuronal elements are activated directly by
spinal cord stimulation. Neuromodulation 2002;5(1):25–31.
48 Hunter JP, Ashby P. Segmental effects of epidural spinal cord
stimulation in humans. J Physiol 1994;474(3):407–19.
49 Gybels J, Van Roost D. Spinal cord stimulation for the modification of dystonic and hyperkinetic conditions: a critical review.
In: Eccles J, Dimitrijevic MR, (eds.) Recent achievements in
restorative neurology. Basel: Karger; 1985. p. 56–70.
50 Sandrini G, Serrao M, Rossi P, Romaniello A, Cruccu G, Willer
JC. The lower limb flexion reflex in humans. Prog Neurobiol
2005;77(6):353–95.
51 Vodovnik L, Bowman BR, Hufford P. Effects of electrical
stimulation on spinal spasticity. Scand J Rehabil Med 1984;16(1):
29–34.
52 Bajd T, Gregoric M, Vodovnik L, Benko H. Electrical stimulation
in treating spasticity resulting from spinal cord injury. Arch Phys
Med Rehabil 1985;66(8):515–7.
53 Stein RB. Functional electrical stimulation after spinal cord injury.
J Neurotrauma 1999;16(8):713–7.
54 Nielsen JF, Sinkjaer T. Long-lasting depression of soleus motoneurons excitability following repetitive magnetic stimuli of the
spinal cord in multiple sclerosis patients. Mult Scler 1997;3(1):
18–30.
55 Edgerton VR, Harkema S. Epidural stimulation of the spinal cord
in spinal cord injury: current status and future challenges. Expert
Rev Neurother 2011;11(10):1351–3.

The Journal of Spinal Cord Medicine

2014

VOL. 37

NO. 2

211

