Neuromodulation: Technology at the Neural Interface
Received: February 5, 2024

Revised: April 30, 2024

Accepted: May 18, 2024

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neurom.2024.05.005

Non-invasive Transcutaneous Spinal Cord
Stimulation Programming Recommendations
for the Treatment of Upper Extremity
Impairment in Tetraplegia
Kristen Gelenitis, PhD1 ; Andrea Santamaria, MD, MBA1;
Jared Pradarelli, DPT1; Markus Rieger, PT, PhD1; Fatma Inanici, MD, PhD2;
Candace Tefertiller, DPT, PhD3; Edelle Field-Fote, PT, PhD4;
James Guest, MD, PhD5; Jenny Suggitt, MSc, OT1; Amanda Turner, BSc1;
Jessica M. D’Amico, PhD1,6,7,a; Chet Moritz, PhD2,8,a
ABSTRACT
Objectives: This study analyzes the stimulation parameters implemented during two successful trials that used non-invasive
transcutaneous spinal cord stimulation (tSCS) to effectively improve upper extremity function after chronic spinal cord injury
(SCI). It proposes a framework to guide stimulation programming decisions for the successful translation of these techniques into
the clinic.
Materials and Methods: Programming data from 60 participants who completed the Up-LIFT trial and from 17 participants who
subsequently completed the LIFT Home trial were analyzed. All observations of stimulation amplitudes, frequencies, waveforms,
and electrode conﬁgurations were examined. The incidence of adverse events and relatedness to stimulation parameters is
reported. A comparison of parameter usage across the American Spinal Injury Association Impairment Scale (AIS) subgroups was
conducted to evaluate stimulation strategies across participants with varying degrees of sensorimotor preservation.
Results: Active (cathodal) electrodes were typically placed between the C3/C4 and C6/C7 spinous processes. Most sessions
featured return (anodal) electrodes positioned bilaterally over the anterior superior iliac spine, although clavicular placement was
frequently used by 12 participants. Stimulation was delivered with a 10-kHz carrier frequency and typically a 30-Hz burst frequency. Biphasic waveforms were used in 83% of sessions. Average stimulation amplitudes were higher for biphasic waveforms.
The AIS B subgroup required signiﬁcantly higher amplitudes than did the AIS C and D subgroups. Device-related adverse events
were infrequent, and not correlated with speciﬁc waveforms or amplitudes. Within the home setting, participants maintained
their current amplitudes within 1% of the preset values. The suggested stimulation programming framework dictates the
following hierarchical order of parameter adjustments: current amplitude, waveform type, active/return electrode positioning,
and burst frequency, guided by clinical observations as required.
Conclusions: This analysis summarizes effective stimulation parameters from the trials and provides a decision-making framework for clinical implementation of tSCS for upper extremity functional restoration after SCI. The parameters are aligned with
existing literature and proved safe and well tolerated by participants.
Address correspondence to: Chet Moritz, PhD, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA. Email: ctmoritz@uw.edu
1

ONWARD Medical, Lausanne, Switzerland;
Departments of Rehabilitation Medicine, Electrical & Computer Engineering, Center for Neurotechnology, University of Washington. Seattle, WA, USA;
3
Craig Hospital. Englewood, CO, USA;
4
Shepherd Center, Crawford Research Institute, Emory University School of Medicine, Department of Rehabilitation Medicine, School of Biological Sciences, Georgia
Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, USA;
5
Neurological Surgery and the Miami Project to Cure Paralysis, Miller School of Medicine, University of Miami, Miami, FL, USA;
6
Glenrose Rehabilitation Hospital, Alberta Health Services. Edmonton, Canada;
7
Department of Medicine, University of Alberta. Edmonton, Canada; and
8
Department of Physiology & Biophysics, University of Washington. Seattle, WA, USA
2

a

Indicates equal contribution.

162

For more information on author guidelines, an explanation of our peer review process, and conﬂict of interest informed consent policies, please see the journal’s Guide
for Authors.
Source(s) of ﬁnancial support: The study was sponsored by ONWARD Medical.

www.neuromodulationjournal.org

© 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. on behalf of the
International Neuromodulation Society. This is an open access article
under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

Neuromodulation 2025; 28: 162–173

CERVICAL TSCS PROGRAMMING RECOMMENDATIONS

Keywords: Amplitude, frequency, motor threshold, noninvasive spinal cord stimulation, spinal cord injury, transcutaneous spinal
cord stimulation, waveform

INTRODUCTION
Upper extremity paralysis or paresis resulting from cervical spinal
cord injury (SCI) severely limits independence, making restoration of
hand function the highest priority for individuals with tetraplegia.1,2
Despite clinical practice guidelines,3 there is lack of consensus on
optimal methods to restore function. Reconstructive upper extremity
surgery can restore speciﬁc joint motion.4–6 Occupational therapy
and task-oriented activity-based training aim to retrain the nervous
system to recover speciﬁc motor tasks, teach compensatory strategies, and improve residual strength and range of motion.7–10 Assistive technologies, including orthoses or robotic exoskeletons, enable
hand postures11,12 but do not restore voluntary movement. Noninvasive electrical stimulation techniques, such as functional electrical
stimulation and neuromuscular electrical stimulation, can be applied
over the skin to stimulate peripheral nerves and/or muscles directly
to initiate muscle contractions in people with SCI.13–15 However,
despite movement-based therapies, preserved neural circuits are
unable to effectively drive synaptic activity in the absence of
adequate descending supraspinal input, leading to a plateau in
functional improvement.16
Current SCI rehabilitation approaches are constrained by the extent
of functional connections between residual neural tissue and supraspinal circuits.17–20 Transcutaneous spinal cord stimulation (tSCS) can
target spinal cord circuits by applying currents through surface

electrodes placed on the skin over the spine.21–26 tSCS modulates
spinal network excitability, enabling preserved descending input to
the injured spinal cord to facilitate voluntary motor output.23,26,27
Eight studies to date have explored the use of tSCS for upper
extremity rehabilitation in individuals with SCI.21–23,25,28–31 A recent
prospective, multicenter trial (Up-LIFT—NCT04697472) revealed the
ability of tSCS in conjunction with rehabilitation to improve arm and
hand function after cervical SCI.32 A subsequent home-based trial (LIFT
Home—NCT05284201) validated the safety and feasibility of using
tSCS during take-home exercises in the home environment.
Although the Up-LIFT trial represents the largest cohort of individuals with SCI receiving tSCS in a prospective trial, best practices
for programming this type of stimulation are yet to be established.
This retrospective analysis reports the stimulation parameters used
during the successful Up-LIFT and LIFT Home trials, assesses the
stimulation parameters used in relation to previous exploratory
studies, and introduces a programming ﬂowchart to guide future
clinical implementation.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Brief Summary of the Up-LIFT and LIFT Home Clinical Trials
The Up-LIFT trial evaluated the safety and effectiveness of programmed non-invasive spinal cord stimulation (ARCEX Therapy,
ONWARD Medical, Inc., Boston, MA) in conjunction with

Figure 1. The ARCEX System. a. The System comprises an application running on a programmer that allows the user to deﬁne or control stimulation programs

www.neuromodulationjournal.org

© 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. on behalf of the
International Neuromodulation Society. This is an open access article
under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

Neuromodulation 2025; 28: 162–173

163

delivered by the stimulator through active and return electrodes (accessories) via the splitter box and extension cables. For upper extremity training, electrodes are
placed over the cervical spine. The device has a voltage-controlled output and measures impedance to ensure that the target current intensity is delivered. Programmed, noninvasive electrical spinal cord stimulation (ARCEX Therapy) is delivered during in-clinic rehabilitation or during take-home exercise. b. Biphasic and
monophasic waveforms both comprise bursts of rectangular pulses. The monophasic waveform includes a charge balance pulse after each burst, with charge balance
amplitudes and durations dependent on the set cathodic (negative current) pulse phase amplitude. The charge balance amplitude was 12.5% of the set cathodic
amplitude, producing charge balance pulse durations of 4000 μs. [Color ﬁgure can be viewed at www.neuromodulationjournal.org]

GELENITIS ET AL

Table 1. Up-LIFT Trial Enrollment Criteria.
Inclusion criteria (must fulﬁll ALL of the following):
• Aged ≥22 y and ≤75 y at the time of enrollment
• Nonprogressive cervical SCI from C2 to C8 inclusive
• ASIA AIS classiﬁcation B, C, or D
• Indicated for upper extremity training procedures by participant’s treating physician, occupational therapist, or physical therapist
• GRASSP-Prehension Performance score ≥ 10 or GRASSP-Strength score ≥ 30
• Minimum 12 mo postinjury
• If prescribed antispasticity or pain medications, must be at stable dose for ≥4 wk before commencing study procedures
• Capable of providing informed consent
Exclusion criteria (may not fulﬁll ANY of the following):
• Has uncontrolled cardiopulmonary disease or cardiac symptoms as determined by the investigator
• Has any unstable or signiﬁcant medical condition that is likely to interfere with study procedures or likely to confound study end point evaluations such as
severe neuropathic pain, depression, mood disorders, or other cognitive disorders
• Has been diagnosed with autonomic dysreﬂexia that is severe, unstable, and uncontrolled
• Requires ventilator support
• Has an autoimmune etiology of spinal cord dysfunction/injury
• History of additional neurologic disease such as stroke, multiple sclerosis, or traumatic brain injury
• Peripheral neuropathy (diabetic polyneuropathy, entrapment neuropathy, etc)
• Spasms that limit the ability of the participants to participate in the study training as determined by the investigator
• Received botulinum toxin injections in their upper extremity, neck, or hand within 6 mo before enrollment
• Has urinary tract infection or any of the following issues in the upper extremity or the cervical spine region at the time of enrollment: painful musculoskeletal
dysfunction unrelated to SCI, unhealed fracture, contracture, pressure sore
• Breakdown in skin area that will come into contact with electrodes
• Presence of syringomyelia as conﬁrmed by an MRI
• Currently undergoing treatment for cancer or has been in remission for <2 y
• Received stem cell treatment within the past 2 y before enrollment
• Prior nerve or tendon transfer procedure in the upper extremities
• Total baclofen dose >30 mg/d
• Has any active implanted medical device
• Pregnant, planning to become pregnant, or currently breastfeeding
• Concurrent participation in another drug or device trial that may interfere with this study
• Has undergone a prior course of spinal stimulation therapy directed at UE improvement
• In the opinion of the investigators, the study is not safe or appropriate for the participant, and/or the participant is unlikely to return for the follow-up visits
per the protocol
ASIA, American Spinal Injury Association; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; UE, upper extremity.
Information adapted from Moritz et al 202432 and clinicaltrials.gov (NCT04697472).

164

rehabilitation, using an earlier generation of the ARCEX System
(Fig. 1). The trial enrolled 65 participants with chronic, cervical
incomplete SCI (American Spinal Injury Association Impairment
Scale [AIS] B, C, and D) across 14 centers. A list of all inclusion/
exclusion criteria can be found in Table 1. All treatment outcomes
and programming guidelines presented in this study are the result
of testing in individuals with SCI meeting these criteria.
A two-month “run-in phase” of upper extremity rehabilitation
was followed by a two-month “treatment phase,” combining tSCS
and rehabilitation (tSCS+rehab). The rehabilitation program was
deﬁned to ensure homogeneity across sites. This program involved
approximately one hour of training, three to four times per week,
with functional task categories that included repetitive activities of
gross upper extremity movement, isolated ﬁnger movements,
simple and complex pinch, and grasping activities. Each participant
performed one to two exercises within each category during each
treatment session. Typical movement patterns were encouraged by
guidance and feedback, whereas compensatory movements, such
as wrist tenodesis, were strongly discouraged.
Sixty subjects completed ≥24 sessions (12 sessions/month) during each phase. At baseline and after each month of therapy, a
battery of assessments was performed to assess upper extremity
strength, function, and sensation, in addition to quality of life and
www.neuromodulationjournal.org

activities of daily living.32 All assessments were performed without
stimulation to assess neuroplastic rather than immediate neuroprosthetic effects of tSCS+rehab. Ultimately, 72% of assessable
participants were responders, achieving clinically meaningful
improvements in at least one strength and one functional assessment.32 Furthermore, 90% of assessable participants achieved
clinically meaningful improvements in at least one strength or
functional assessment.32
The subsequent LIFT Home trial assessed the safety of tSCS
during take-home exercises in the home setting. A total of 17
participants in the previous Up-LIFT trial received a device preprogrammed with treatment parameters found to facilitate their
upper extremity function during in-clinic sessions. On average,
participants completed three to four at-home training sessions per
week for one month. Training encompassed many of the same
functional tasks as during the Up-LIFT trial, personalized to the
participants’ activities of daily living and using objects available in
the home. More than 96% of attempted at-home training sessions
were successfully completed. No serious adverse events (AEs) and
no device-related AEs were reported. Importantly, effectiveness
analyses revealed participants were able to further improve on the
progress achieved during in-clinic rehabilitation after only one
month of at-home therapy (Δ Capabilities of Upper Extremity Test

© 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. on behalf of the
International Neuromodulation Society. This is an open access article
under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

Neuromodulation 2025; 28: 162–173

www.neuromodulationjournal.org

60 min/session
Clavicles or iliac crests 60–90 mA

55 ± 2 min/session
5–68 mA
Clavicles

60 ± 20 min/session
60–120 min/session
60–120 min/session
20 min/session
Not speciﬁed
80–120 mA
20–100 mA
10–250 mA
55–95 mA
102 mA
ASIS
ASIS
Iliac crests
Iliac crests
Clavicles

40–90 mA
ASIS

Biphasic and monophasic One above and one below
level of injury
1 ms
Biphasic
C3/C4 and C6/C7
Not speciﬁed Not speciﬁed
C5 spinous process
1 ms
Biphasic and monophasic C3/C4 and C6/C7
2 ms
Biphasic
C5/C6
2 ms
Biphasic
T2–T4 posterior, C4/C5
anterior
1 ms
Not speciﬁed
Single large electrode spanning C5–T2 spinous
processes
1 ms
Biphasic
C3/C4, C5/C6, C7/T1, and
T11–T12
5 kHz
Sharma et al, 202328

30 Hz

NA
Murray and Knikou, 201725 0.2 Hz

30 Hz
5–30 Hz
30 Hz
30 Hz
0.2 Hz
Inanici et al, 201822
Freyvert et al, 201830
Gad et al, 201823
Benavides et al, 202029
Wu et al, 202031

Inanici et al, 2021

10 kHz
NA
10 kHz
5 kHz
NA

1 ms
10 kHz
30 Hz

Amplitude
Return electrode
Active electrode
Stimulation waveform
Burst frequency Carrier frequency Pulse width

21

Publication

© 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. on behalf of the
International Neuromodulation Society. This is an open access article
under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

Neuromodulation 2025; 28: 162–173

165

Adjustment of Stimulation Parameters Throughout the Up-LIFT
Trial
Baseline abilities without stimulation were assessed through
quick measurements such as the time to complete a task (eg, fasten
a shirt button), voluntary force using a dynamometer, and the
number of task repetitions before fatigue (eg, lifting a full cup), or
through evaluating movement quality (eg, handwriting). Once
baseline was established, study personnel began stimulation with
the recommended initial parameters above.
Therapeutic amplitudes were determined in the Up-LIFT and LIFT
Home trials by gradually increasing amplitude at continuous
stimulation burst frequency (typically 30 Hz) from 0 mA until the
baseline ability improved or until the participant reached their
tolerance for stimulation intensity. The gradual increase in intensity
allowed time for some habituation to the sensation of stimulation
so that individuals could tolerate intensities that may have initially
been uncomfortable. Just as prior tSCS studies used posterior root
muscle reﬂexes or twitch responses to determine stimulation
amplitudes,21,33,34 Up-LIFT investigators could optionally determine
twitch thresholds (TTs), the amplitude at which the ﬁrst visible
upper extremity muscle twitches occurred, and voluntary movement thresholds (VMTs), to guide therapeutic amplitude selection.
Visual observation of a muscle twitch (TT) is commonly used to
help identify stimulation parameters for spinal cord stimulation.
VMT was deﬁned as the amplitude at which the clinician observed
or the participant reported improved performance, such as easier

Table 2. Stimulation Parameters Used in Feasibility Studies of tSCS for Upper Extremity Rehabilitation After SCI.

Initial Stimulation Parameters
Study personnel received a study manual for the LIFT device and
training on device capabilities, parameter ranges, and troubleshooting. Stimulation was delivered using two round (1.25-inch
diameter) active (cathodal) electrodes and two rectangular (1.5inch × 3.5-inch) return (anodal) electrodes (Axelgaard
Manufacturing Co Ltd). Stimulation comprised bursts of rectangular
pulses delivered in charge-balanced monophasic or biphasic
waveforms modulated by a carrier frequency (Fig. 1). The two
active electrodes were supplied by two independent stimulation
channels. Each stimulation channel was connected to both return
electrodes through a branched cable connection. Initial therapy
recommended settings were informed by early feasibility studies
and existing literature (Table 2).21–23 These included positioning the
active electrodes over the C3/C4 and C6/C7 spinous processes
through palpation, placing the return electrodes bilaterally over the
anterior superior iliac spine (ASIS) with the long axis parallel to the
most prominent bony structure, selecting a carrier frequency of 10
kHz, a burst frequency of 30 Hz, a pulse width of 1 millisecond, and
a biphasic stimulation waveform. Each site, however, had the
ﬂexibility to explore additional conﬁgurations based on individual
participant anatomy, tolerance, and responses to tSCS. Before athome use, participants and persons providing assistance also
received training on device usage. To ensure effective and safe
stimulation, at-home reprogramming capabilities were limited to
adjusting the amplitude within ±10% of the value set by the
researchers and informed by the participant’s performance during
in-clinic sessions.

Duration

score = 1.9; Δ pinch force = 4.6 N; Δ grasp force = 6.0 N) (Tefertiller
et al, in preparation). Both the Up-LIFT and LIFT Home trials
received institutional review board or ethics committee approval at
each site.

Up to 120 min/session

CERVICAL TSCS PROGRAMMING RECOMMENDATIONS

GELENITIS ET AL
initiation of movement or increased readiness to move. During
these optional, intermittent tests, stimulation amplitude was progressively increased with a burst frequency of 30 Hz for VMT and
0.5 to 1 Hz for TT until the threshold was obtained.
The efﬁcacy of programming conﬁgurations was assessed over a
minimum of three sessions before readjusting stimulation parameters. Study personnel evaluated functional performance within
and across these sessions, often using quick assessments to
determine parameter efﬁcacy. User feedback, including participantreported sensations, stimulation tolerance, ease of movement,
muscle tone and spasticity, and secondary effects of the stimulation, such as soreness or fatigue, and new perceived changes in
ability, were also considered. Safety, including device-related AEs,
and particularly the maintenance of skin integrity around electrode
sites, was carefully monitored. If the stimulation appeared effective
after multiple therapy sessions, training continued with the
selected parameters. If discomfort or no improvement was
observed, one parameter was adjusted at a time to seek more
effective settings, except for pulse width, which always remained at
1 millisecond. This cycle was repeated with different conﬁgurations
until satisfactory settings were found.
Data Collection and Analysis
Device parameter and usage data from both the Up-LIFT and LIFT
Home trials were analyzed, along with thorough reviews of participant and clinician comments and ﬁeld observations. The placement
of active and return electrodes, burst and carrier frequencies, and
stimulation waveform usage were summarized. Amplitudes, TTs, and
VMTs were summarized using descriptive statistics for all relevant
observations of each waveform and each AIS subgroup. Normality of
the amplitude data was conﬁrmed using the Shapiro-Wilk test. Statistical comparisons of current amplitude across AIS subgroups were
conducted using a one-way repeated-measures analysis of variance,
with post hoc Bonferroni corrections for multiple comparisons.
Threshold data, being nonnormal, were compared using the twosided Wilcoxon signed-rank test. All statistical analyses were conducted using validated statistical software (Python version 3.9 with
SciPy package version 1.7.3) with a signiﬁcance level of 0.05. Data are
reported as mean ± standard deviation.

RESULTS
Active Electrode Placement
Active electrode placement with one electrode placed rostrally
and another electrode caudally to the injury level were shown to be
effective in feasibility studies.21–23 Given the high incidence of
injuries near the C4 to C5 level,35 it was initially advised to position
the upper and lower active electrodes on the midline above the C3/
C4 and C6/C7 spinous processes, respectively. Adherence to these
guidelines was high, with 52% of all observations using the C3/C4
and C6/C7 active electrode placements, irrespective of return
placement. Although other active electrode locations were tested,
they remained within the recommended levels of C3 to T1 (rostral
range: C3/C4–C6/C7; caudal range: C5/C6–C7/T1). Distribution of
rostral and caudal active electrode placements was similar whether
return electrodes were placed over the ASIS or clavicles (Fig. 2).

166

Return Electrode Placement
Although most sessions (89%) used bilateral return electrodes over
the ASIS, several sessions explored alternate placement over the
clavicles (Table 3). Similar to placement over the ASIS, the long axes of
www.neuromodulationjournal.org

Figure 2. Active electrode placements across Up-LIFT sessions. A total of 1502
instances of reported active electrode conﬁgurations were used, with 1342
instances using ASIS return electrode placement and 160 instances using
clavicular return electrode placement. Placement of rostral and caudal active
electrodes with return electrode placed over the ASIS (darker pink and gray
bars) and clavicles (lighter pink and gray bars). [Color ﬁgure can be viewed at
www.neuromodulationjournal.org]

the rectangular return electrodes were placed parallel to the orientation of the clavicle bones in these instances. Clavicle placement was
primarily attempted in nonresponsive participants who continued to
exhibit slow progress after other stimulation program modiﬁcations or
who experienced aversion to stimulation with return electrodes over
the ASIS. Of 60 participants, 18 (30%) used clavicle placement in at
least one session, with 11 participants (61%) expressing a preference
for clavicle placement over ASIS owing to improved sensation/stimulation tolerance (n = 6, 55%) or improved function (n = 5, 45%). Only
one participant attempting clavicle placement reported reduced
comfort. For the remaining participants, clavicle placement was
tolerable but did not lead to substantial changes in performance, so
the original ASIS placement was resumed.
The utilization of bilateral clavicle placement varied depending
on preference and the timing of its introduction, with 12 participants using it in >20% of their total sessions. The proportions of
participants in AIS B, C, and D subgroups who frequently used
clavicle return electrode placements were 56% (5/9), 21% (6/28),
and 4% (1/23) respectively. Among frequent users of clavicle
placement, seven participants (58%, all AIS C or D) were classiﬁed
as responders at study completion.
Stimulation Parameters
Burst and Carrier Frequencies
The stimulator enabled adjustment of burst and carrier frequencies. On the basis of feasibility studies (Table 2), a burst frequency of 30 Hz and carrier frequency of 10 kHz were initially
recommended. All participants used the 10-kHz carrier frequency
for all exercises, and >98% of exercise observations used the 30-Hz
burst frequency (Table 4).
Although several participants attempted exercises with varying
burst frequencies (from 20–100 Hz), only two continued using
these different burst frequencies during ≥10% of their recorded
exercises. These participants reported excessive tone and spasticity,
which hindered active participation in therapy sessions, prompting
investigators to explore alternate frequencies. Frequencies >30 Hz
were noted to decrease tone and facilitate participation in
rehabilitation.

© 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. on behalf of the
International Neuromodulation Society. This is an open access article
under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

Neuromodulation 2025; 28: 162–173

CERVICAL TSCS PROGRAMMING RECOMMENDATIONS

Table 3. Use of Clavicles for Return Electrode Placement During the Up-LIFT Trial.
Use of clavicles for return electrode placement

n

%

Total tSCS+rehab training sessions
Sessions with return electrodes on clavicles
Total participants (modiﬁed intent-to-treat population*)
Participants testing return electrodes on clavicles
Participants indicating clavicles preferred
Preference due to:
Improved sensation
Improved function
Participants documenting discomfort with clavicles
Participants with frequent clavicle use (>20% sessions)
Frequent clavicle users who were responders
AIS C
AIS D
Frequent clavicle users who were nonresponders
AIS B

1504
162
60
18
11
6
5
1
12
7
6
1
5
5

11%
30%
61%
55%
45%
5.6%
67%
58%
86%
14%
42%
100%

*Modiﬁed intent-to-treat population includes all individuals who completed ≥24 sessions (12/mo) of rehab alone, and ≥24 sessions (12/mo) of tSCS+rehab.

Stimulation Waveforms
Both biphasic and monophasic waveforms were charge-balanced,
with monophasic waveforms including a comparatively long, low
amplitude return phase after each burst (Fig. 1). Biphasic waveforms
provide milder stimulation with a more gradual ramp-up in stimulation amplitude, which may limit the development of excessive
muscle tone that may interfere with motor function. Therefore, UpLIFT investigators were advised to begin with biphasic stimulation
but had the ﬂexibility to test either waveform. Most exercises (83%)
during the Up-LIFT trial used biphasic stimulation (Fig. 3).
Current Amplitude
Therapeutic current amplitudes were identiﬁed on the basis of
visual observations of motor performance and participant feedback, with frequent adjustments within and between sessions. The
average amplitudes used across all exercises and participants were
39.3 ± 25.5 mA and 52.4 ± 31.0 mA for monophasic and biphasic
stimulation waveforms, respectively (Fig. 3, p < 0.001).
Notably, the AIS B subgroup used higher therapeutic amplitudes
than did the AIS C and D subgroups for both monophasic (Δ
mean = 22.7 ± 40.0] and 22.0 ± 41.3, respectively) and biphasic
stimulation (Δ mean = 16.1 ± 45.0 and 26.7 ± 42.3, respectively) (all
p < 0.001). AIS C and D subgroups differed signiﬁcantly in

Table 4. Summary of Burst and Carrier Frequencies Used in the Up-LIFT
Trial.
Observations (%)

Participants (%)

20
30
60
90
100 Hz
All others (30–90 Hz)

4 (0.04%)
8893 (98.83%)
47 (0.52%)
40 (0.45%)
3 (0.03%)
11 (0.12%)

2 (3.3%)
60 (100%)
3 (5%)
3 (5%)
1 (1.7%)
8 (13%)

Carrier frequency (kHz)

Observations (%)

Participants (%)

10

8998 (100%)

60 (100%)

www.neuromodulationjournal.org

Twitch Thresholds and Voluntary Movement Thresholds
The optional TTs and VMTs were recorded for at least one session
in 33 of 60 participants (55%) across eight of the 14 sites (57%).
Average TT and VMT values were 40.6 ± 12.8 mA and 50.8 ± 17.9
mA, respectively, for monophasic stimulation, and 64.3 ± 33.3 mA
and 59.6 ± 35.5 for biphasic stimulation (Fig. 5). The recorded mean
VMT values were signiﬁcantly higher than the TT values for
monophasic stimulation but signiﬁcantly lower for biphasic stimulation (all p < 0.001).
Parameters in Use During Device-Related AEs
The incidence of device-related AEs occurring during stimulation
was low, and these events were only mild to moderate in severity
and promptly resolved when stimulation was turned off or current
amplitude was reduced. To determine whether speciﬁc stimulation
parameters were associated with a higher likelihood of AEs, we
examined the waveform and average current amplitudes within
sessions in which “at least possibly” device-related AEs occurred
(Table 5). There were no serious AEs related to the device or study
procedures in either trial. In addition, the incidence of nonserious,
device-related AEs was low (1.5% of all tSCS+rehab sessions). The
distribution of monophasic and biphasic waveforms used during
these occurrences mirrored the overall waveform usage in the
study. Stimulation amplitudes used during these occurrences were
lower than the average amplitudes used for each waveform, and
signiﬁcantly below the maximum amplitudes tested throughout
the study.
Programming Adjustments in the Home Setting
In the LIFT Home trial, stimulators were preconﬁgured with up to
two home-use therapy programs based on parameters found to be
comfortable and effective during in-clinic sessions. Although participants primarily used program 1, program 2 allowed an alternate
waveform or amplitude range for speciﬁc exercises as needed. The
training dose completed by participants in LIFT Home was equivalent to one month of in-clinic therapy (Table 6).

© 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. on behalf of the
International Neuromodulation Society. This is an open access article
under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

Neuromodulation 2025; 28: 162–173

167

Burst Frequency (Hz)

amplitude only within the biphasic waveform (Δ mean = 10.6 ±
41.3] mA; p < 0.001) (Fig. 4).

GELENITIS ET AL

Figure 3. Waveform usage. a. Monophasic and biphasic stimulation waveform usage within the Up-LIFT trial (number of observations = 8998). b. Distribution of
amplitudes used with monophasic and biphasic waveforms. All reported amplitudes represent the cathodic pulse phase amplitude for each waveform. Vertical
dashed lines represent the mean amplitudes for each waveform, calculated as the average amplitudes across both active electrodes for all participants and all relevant
exercise observations within each waveform (monophasic: number of observations = 3042, number of participants = 36; biphasic: number of observations = 14,954,
number of participants = 58). Mean monophasic and biphasic amplitudes were signiﬁcantly different (*p < 0.001). [Color ﬁgure can be viewed at
www.neuromodulationjournal.org]

Participants typically did not need to adjust the preset current
amplitudes. Considering all sessions, the amplitudes delivered at
home through both programs remained within 1% ± 4% of the
investigator-determined, prespeciﬁed values. When adjustments
were made, increases in amplitude within the allowed 10% range

were more common than decreases. Average increases were 9% ±
2%, and average decreases were 6% ± 3% across both programs.
No participant required set-point reprogramming, indicating the
preprogrammed settings were well tolerated at home and that
participants were generally satisﬁed with the values identiﬁed by

168

Figure 4. Amplitude usage by AIS subgroup. Panel a shows monophasic and panel b biphasic waveforms. Vertical dashed lines represent the mean amplitudes for
each subgroup, calculated as the average amplitudes across both active electrodes for all participants and all relevant exercise observations within each waveform. N
refers to the total number of participants within each AIS subgroup, n refers to the number of participants contributing to the observations within each subgroup and
waveform, and o refers to the number of observations. *Statistically signiﬁcant difference among designated AIS subgroups (all p < 0.001). [Color ﬁgure can be viewed
at www.neuromodulationjournal.org]
www.neuromodulationjournal.org

© 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. on behalf of the
International Neuromodulation Society. This is an open access article
under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

Neuromodulation 2025; 28: 162–173

CERVICAL TSCS PROGRAMMING RECOMMENDATIONS
recent research shows electrode arrays aligned with the segmental
location of cervical motor pools increase the relative amplitude of
speciﬁc evoked responses,36 the clinical utility of this feature has
not been methodically addressed for people with SCI. Moreover,
anatomical variations pose challenges in determining precisely
which segmental neural circuits are being stimulated, with lack of
speciﬁcity an inherent property of tSCS.37 Indeed, this therapy is
not meant to drive speciﬁc muscle group functions but to enhance
basal excitability to enable voluntary activation of preserved
neuronal substrates, and lack of speciﬁcity does not preclude the
clinical value of the intervention. Therefore, active electrode repositioning is a lower priority for adjustments and reserved mainly for
instances when discomfort or poor electrode adherence due to
prior scars are evident.

Figure 5. Twitch thresholds (TTs) and voluntary movement thresholds (VMTs)
identiﬁed in the Up-LIFT trial. Thresholds are averaged across all relevant
measurements within each waveform (TT monophasic: number of observations = 40, number of participants = 9; TT biphasic: number of observations =
156, number of participants = 33; VMT monophasic: number of observations =
41, number of participants = 10; VMT biphasic: number of observations = 152,
number of participants = 31). Error bars indicate standard error of the mean.
*p < 0.001. [Color ﬁgure can be viewed at www.neuromodulationjournal.org]

study personnel through their sessions in the Up-LIFT trial. Still,
65% of LIFT Home participants (11/17) made at least one adjustment at home, indicating ease of use and conﬁdence with selfadjustment. Only two incidences of extra research clinic visits
were required to adjust stimulation parameters, and these were
speciﬁc to the stimulation waveform within a single at-home
therapy program.

DISCUSSION
The Up-LIFT and LIFT Home trials showed the safety and effectiveness of tSCS combined with rehabilitation or take-home exercises
in improving upper extremity strength and function in individuals
with chronic incomplete cervical SCI. No serious device-related AEs
were reported during the trials, and nonserious device-related AEs did
not correlate with any particular stimulation parameter used.

www.neuromodulationjournal.org

Stimulation Frequencies
The 10-kHz carrier frequency was consistently used in all stimulation sessions during the Up-LIFT and LIFT Home trials.27,38
Although the use of alternative carrier frequencies was not systematically investigated, the low incidence of device-related AEs,
particularly those related to pain or discomfort, across both trials
supports the safety and recommendation for continued use of this
parameter.
Although most stimulation sessions used a 30-Hz burst frequency, higher burst frequencies were tested for participants
experiencing hand spasticity and increased tone hindering therapy
participation. Higher frequencies have been reported to decrease
spasticity in individuals with SCI.39,40 Higher burst frequencies (50
Hz) can decrease exaggerated reﬂex responsiveness,39 decrease
clonus and cutaneous-input-evoked spasms evoked by cutaneous

© 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. on behalf of the
International Neuromodulation Society. This is an open access article
under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

Neuromodulation 2025; 28: 162–173

169

Active Electrodes
Multisite stimulation was favored in the Up-LIFT and LIFT Home
trials, speciﬁcally positioning active electrodes between C3/C4 and
C6/C7 spinous processes. This electrode montage spans the cervical enlargement, allowing current delivery to many neural circuits
involved in upper extremity function. Multisite stimulation is also
effective for distal muscle contraction and enhances motor evoked
potential responses.24 Preliminary studies have similarly shown
improved motor function with multisite stimulation.21–23 Although

Return Electrodes
Although most prior tSCS studies for upper extremity rehabilitation in SCI used ASIS placement for return electrodes, some
studies have indicated successful evoked upper extremity
responses with return electrodes positioned over the clavicles
(Table 2).25,28,31 It was hypothesized that this clavicle conﬁguration
may provide a more focused current path that could potentially
beneﬁt participants who did not sufﬁciently respond otherwise.
Return electrode placement over the clavicles was well tolerated
and seemed beneﬁcial for participants unresponsive to tSCS when
the electrodes were placed over the ASIS. Although the manipulation of return electrode placement to the clavicles allowed all
participants who were previously unresponsive in the AIS C or D
groups to meet the predeﬁned responder criteria, this was not the
case for individuals with more severe impairments in the AIS B
group. It is important to note that the AIS B subgroup was the least
responsive to tSCS+rehab overall.32 This suggests that the lack of
response is more likely related to the severity of their injuries and
signiﬁcantly reduced preservation of residual descending neural
connectivity when compared with the other subgroups. It is likely
that individuals with more severe injuries may require more
frequent and signiﬁcant adjustments in stimulation parameters to
achieve observable improvements. These ﬁndings should be
interpreted cautiously owing to small sample sizes and confounding factors. The recommendation for initial return electrode
placement remains over the ASIS on the basis of success in feasibility studies and for most participants in the Up-LIFT and LIFT
Home trials, but placement on the clavicles may be explored as
needed should other parameter adjustments not sufﬁce.

GELENITIS ET AL

Table 5. Stimulation Parameters Associated With Device-Related AEs in the Up-LIFT Trial.

Total tSCS+rehab sessions
tSCS+rehab sessions with AE possibly device-related
Causality:
Possibly related*
Probably related†
Causal relationship‡
AE MedDRA preferred term:
Autonomic dysreﬂexia†
Bladder spasm*,†
Burning sensation†
Dizziness*
Erythema‡
Headache†
Hyperhidrosis*,†
Malaise†
Medical device site reaction*
Nausea†
Pain*,‡
Respiratory rate increased†
Skin irritation†
Urinary incontinence*
Stimulation waveform during device-related AEs
Monophasic
Biphasic
Stimulation amplitudes during device-related AEs
Mean (SD)
Median
Min, max

Count (% of sessions)

Participants (% of mITT population)

1504 (100%)
23 (1.5%)

60 (100%)
11 (18%)

Count (% of device-related AEs)

Count (% of patients experiencing AEs)

9 (39%)
12 (52%)
2 (9%)

6 (55%)
5 (45%)
2 (18%)

2 (9%)
4 (7%)
1 (4%)
2 (9%)
1 (4%)
2 (9%)
3 (13%)
1 (4%)
1 (4%)
1 (4%)
2 (9%)
1 (4%)
1 (4%)
1 (4%)

1 (9%)
1 (9%)
1 (9%)
1 (9%)
1 (9%)
2 (18%)
3 (27%)
1 (9%)
1 (9%)
1 (9%)
2 (18%)
1 (9%)
1 (9%)
1 (9%)

5 (22%)
18 (78%)
Monophasic
22.7 (13.5)
24.2
5.8, 37.9

4 (36%)
7 (64%)
Biphasic
36.6 (9.7)
33.5
17.9, 51.7

mITT population includes all individuals who completed ≥24 sessions of rehab alone, followed by ≥24 sessions of tSCS+rehab.
MedDRA, Medical Dictionary for Regulatory Activities; mITT, modiﬁed intent-to-treat.
*Possibly related; †probably related; and ‡causal relationship to device use.

input,41 and decrease hyperreﬂexic stretch responses42 in people
with SCI. Although the use of higher frequencies was limited to two
participants with problematic spasticity, the observed results and
the potential facilitation of motor function through decreasing
muscle tone are supported by existing literature.
Relationships Between Waveform, Amplitude, and Thresholds
Transcutaneous biphasic stimulation may be superior in facilitating ﬁne motor control tasks, whereas monophasic stimulation

may be more effective at improving strength.21 Interestingly, the
recorded VMTs were signiﬁcantly higher than the TTs for monophasic stimulation, whereas they were signiﬁcantly lower for
biphasic stimulation (Fig. 5). This suggests that biphasic stimulation
may facilitate voluntary movement before inducing unwanted
twitch contractions, supporting the initial use of the biphasic
setting for therapy.
Appropriate determination of stimulation amplitudes relative
to motor thresholds is debated. Submotor, motor, and

Table 6. Duration of tSCS+rehab During the Up-LIFT and LIFT Home Trials.
Sessions/mo
Up-LIFT (2-mo tSCS+rehab phase)
Mean (SD)
12.5 (1.2)
Median
12
Min, max
9, 16
LIFT Home (1-mo tSCS+rehab phase)
Mean (SD)
12.3 (2.9)
Median
12
Min, max
6, 20

Total sessions

Duration of stimulation/session (HH:mm)

Cumulative stimulation duration (HH:mm)

25.1 (1.5)
24
24, 29

1:00 (0:05)
1:00
0:25, 1:29

25:10 (1:54)
24:14
21:30, 30:31

12.3 (2.9)
12
6, 20

0:59 (0:10)
1:00
0:41, 1:13

12:08 (3:10)
12:08
4:28, 18:15

170
www.neuromodulationjournal.org

© 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. on behalf of the
International Neuromodulation Society. This is an open access article
under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

Neuromodulation 2025; 28: 162–173

CERVICAL TSCS PROGRAMMING RECOMMENDATIONS

Figure 6. tSCS parameter determination ﬂowchart based on strategies used in the successful Up-LIFT trial. MEP, motor evoked potential; UE, upper extremity. [Color
ﬁgure can be viewed at www.neuromodulationjournal.org]

www.neuromodulationjournal.org

Programming Recommendations
The initial programming guidance and unique site-by-site
processes used to determine effective stimulation parameters
in each participant were informed by personnel with expertise in
tSCS and SCI rehabilitation. Combining this historical knowledge
with the resultant successful programming outputs previously
outlined, an updated tSCS programming ﬂowchart has been
created to guide future implementation of this technology
(Fig. 6). Amplitude remains the most frequently manipulated
parameter. Should simple amplitude adjustments fail to facilitate
meaningful improvement, we suggest reducing the amplitude
and changing the waveform to monophasic, given clinical
effectiveness was shown within the clinical trials with both
waveforms. We then suggest adjusting in order as needed: active
electrode location, return electrode location, and ﬁnally, burst
frequency. Burst frequency is the ﬁnal suggested adjustment
because to date, there is a lack of existing evidence supporting
upper extremity improvement as a function of burst frequency,
whereas adjustments in other parameters were shown to be
beneﬁcial in the trials.

CONCLUSIONS
The Up-LIFT and LIFT Home trials represent a signiﬁcant milestone in the ﬁeld of neuromodulation by indicating the safety,
usability, and effectiveness of tSCS therapy for recovery after SCI in
clinical and home environments. SCI is an intricate condition, with
various injury characteristics determining the trajectory of neurologic recovery, extent of SCI secondary health conditions (ie,
spasticity), and overall treatment plans (pharmacologic, surgical,
etc). Trial exclusion criteria aimed to minimize this variability;
however, the need to individually optimize stimulation strategies
across various speciﬁc deﬁcits remains apparent. The proposed
workﬂow provides structured guidance, incorporating practices
that showed beneﬁcial outcomes within the heterogeneous study

© 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. on behalf of the
International Neuromodulation Society. This is an open access article
under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

Neuromodulation 2025; 28: 162–173

171

supramotor thresholds have all been reported as methods to
optimize particular upper extremity responses.43 One study
showed that using submotor threshold stimulation led to
improved pinch force, The Graded Redeﬁned Assessment of
Strength, Sensibility and Prehension (GRASSP) sensibility, and
GRASSP prehension abilities for individuals with SCI.21 A separate
study found using amplitudes equivalent to motor threshold led
to improvements in grip strength.23 Still others have indicated
positive outcomes in upper extremity functions when using
supramotor threshold stimuli. 31,34 In both the Up-LIFT and LIFT
Home trials, stimulation amplitude was not restricted to predetermined motor thresholds. Instead, it was individualized on
the basis of visual observations and feedback. Amplitudes used
in the AIS B subgroup were signiﬁcantly higher than in participants in AIS C and D, indicating a potential need for more
intense stimulation in individuals with more severe SCI. This
aligns with previous studies, in which participants in AIS B
generally required higher current amplitudes.21 This trend also
suggests that participants in AIS B might tolerate higher amplitudes before experiencing discomfort, possibly owing to differences in sensory sparing. Importantly, stimulation amplitude did
not correlate with the incidence of potentially device-related
AEs, reinforcing the safety and tolerance across the full range
of the stimulation amplitudes used in the trials (1–180 mA).
Comparisons of stimulation parameters (amplitudes, waveforms, active and return electrode placements) used by
responders and nonresponders in the Up-LIFT trial were performed, with no signiﬁcant differences found. Because 99% of
observations used a 30-Hz burst frequency and all observations
used a 10-kHz carrier frequency, a comparison of frequencies in
responders and nonresponders was not feasible. A lack of clear
distinction between universally effective and noneffective
parameters is unsurprising owing to the heterogeneity of the
participant population, differences in sensory preservation, skin
impedance, and anatomy, which can affect effective stimulation
parameters.

GELENITIS ET AL
population. The intention is not to prescribe a rigid protocol but
rather to assist users with a reﬁned decision-making algorithm that
will facilitate the implementation of this novel intervention in the
clinic and home settings.

Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge Dr Sukhvinder Kalsi-Ryan, BScPT, MSc,
PhD; Dr Randy Trumbower, PT, PhD; Dr Leslie Morse, DO; Dr Ralph
Marino, MD; Dr Kristin Zhao, PhD; Dr Andrei Krassioukov, MD, PhD;
Dr Linda Murray, PhD; Dr Thomas Janssen, PhD; Dr Ilse van Nes, MD,
PhD; and Dr Margaret Purcell, MD, for their support as investigators
during the UP-LIFT trial. The authors also thank Dr Mark S. Nash,
PhD; Dr Noam Harel, MD, PhD; and Dr Graham Creasey, MBChB,
who were part of the trial’s safety monitoring board.

Authorship Statements
Kristen Gelenitis and Jessica M. D’Amico performed the study
analysis and interpretation of results. Kristen Gelenitis, Andrea
Santamaria, and Jessica M. D’Amico prepared the manuscript. Jared
Pradarelli and Markus Rieger assisted in revising the ﬂow diagram
to its ﬁnal form on the basis of their experience as ONWARD ﬁeld
clinical specialists involved in the Up-LIFT and LIFT Home trials.
Fatma Inanici created the initial version of the programming ﬂow
diagram that helped guide investigators during the Up-LIFT trial.
Edelle Field-Fote, James Guest, Chet Moritz, and Candace Tefertiller
were investigators during the Up-LIFT trial and collaborated on
manuscript editing and reﬁnement. Jenny Suggitt and Amanda
Turner were study personnel for the Up-LIFT and LIFT Home trials.
All authors approved the ﬁnal manuscript.

Conﬂict of Interest
Kristen Gelenitis, Jared Pradarelli, Jenny Suggitt, Amanda Turner,
and Markus Rieger are employees of ONWARD Medical. Andrea
Santamaria, Jessica M D’Amico, Edelle Field-Fote, and Chet Moritz
are paid consultants of ONWARD Medical. The remaining authors
reported no conﬂict of interest.



How to Cite This Article



Gelenitis K., Santamaria A., Pradarelli J., Rieger M.,
Inanici F., Tefertiller C., Field-Fote E., Guest J., Suggitt J.,
Turner A., D’Amico J.M., Moritz C. 2025. Non-invasive
Transcutaneous Spinal Cord Stimulation Programming
Recommendations for the Treatment of Upper Extremity
Impairment in Tetraplegia.
Neuromodulation 2025; 28: 162–173.





REFERENCES

172

1. Anderson KD. Targeting recovery: priorities of the spinal cord-injured population.
J Neurotrauma. 2004;21:1371–1383.
2. Snoek GJ, IJzerman MJ, Hermens HJ, Maxwell D, Biering-Sorensen F. Survey of the
needs of patients with spinal cord injury: impact and priority for improvement in
hand function in tetraplegics. Spinal Cord. 2004;42:526–532.

www.neuromodulationjournal.org

3. Paralyzed Veterans of America Consortium for Spinal Cord Medicine. Preservation
of upper limb function following spinal cord injury: a clinical practice guideline for
health-care professionals. J Spinal Cord Med. 2005;28:434–470.
4. Bertelli JA, Ghizoni MF. Nerve transfers for elbow and ﬁnger extension reconstruction in midcervical spinal cord injuries. J Neurosurg. 2015;122:121–127.
5. van Zyl N, Hahn JB, Cooper CA, Weymouth MD, Flood SJ, Galea MP. Upper limb
reinnervation in C6 tetraplegia using a triple nerve transfer: case report. J Hand
Surg Am. 2014;39:1779–1783.
6. Bryden AM, Peljovich AE, Hoyen HA, Nemunaitis G, Kilgore KL, Keith MW. Surgical
restoration of arm and hand function in people with tetraplegia. Top Spinal Cord Inj
Rehabil. 2012;18:43–49.
7. Hoffman H, Sierro T, Niu T, et al. Rehabilitation of hand function after spinal cord
injury using a novel handgrip device: a pilot study. J Neuroeng Rehabil. 2017;14:22.
8. Beekhuizen KS, Field-Fote EC. Sensory stimulation augments the effects of massed
practice training in persons with tetraplegia. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2008;89:602–
608.
9. Harness ET, Astorino TA, Knoblach SM, Feather J. Change in neuroplasticity-related
proteins in response to acute activity-based therapy in persons with spinal cord
injury. Top Spinal Cord Inj Rehabil. 2014;20:147–157.
10. Jones ML, Evans N, Tefertiller C, et al. Activity-based therapy for recovery of
walking in individuals with chronic spinal cord injury: results from a randomized
clinical trial. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2014;95:2239–2246.e2.
11. Correia C, Nuckols K, Wagner D, et al. Improving grasp function after spinal cord
injury with a soft robotic glove. IEEE Trans Neural Syst Rehabil Eng. 2020;28:1407–
1415.
12. Cappello L, Meyer JT, Galloway KC, et al. Assisting hand function after spinal cord
injury with a fabric-based soft robotic glove. J Neuroeng Rehabil. 2018;15:59.
13. Luo S, Xu H, Zuo Y, Liu X, All AH. A review of functional electrical stimulation
treatment in spinal cord injury. NeuroMolecular Med. 2020;22:447–463.
14. Kapadia N, Moineau B, Popovic MR. Functional electrical stimulation therapy for
retraining reaching and grasping after spinal cord injury and stroke. Front Neurosci.
2020;14:718.
15. de Freitas GR, Szpoganicz C, Ilha J. Does neuromuscular electrical stimulation
therapy increase voluntary muscle strength after spinal cord injury? A systematic
review. Top Spinal Cord Inj Rehabil. 2018;24:6–17.
16. Taccola G, Sayenko D, Gad P, Gerasimenko Y, Edgerton VR. And yet it moves: recovery
of volitional control after spinal cord injury. Prog Neurobiol. 2018;160:64–81.
17. Dimitrijevic MR, Dimitrijevic MM, Faganel J, Sherwood AM. Suprasegmentally
induced motor unit activity in paralyzed muscles of patients with established
spinal cord injury. Ann Neurol. 1984;16:216–221.
18. Kakulas BA. Pathology of spinal injuries. Cent Nerv Syst Trauma. 1984;1:117–129.
19. Sherwood AM, Dimitrijevic MR, McKay WB. Evidence of subclinical brain inﬂuence in
clinically complete spinal cord injury: discomplete SCI. J Neurol Sci. 1992;110:90–98.
20. Dimitrijevic MR, Faganel J, Lehmkuhl D, Sherwood A. Motor control in man after
partial or complete spinal cord injury. Adv Neurol. 1983;39:915–926.
21. Inanici F, Brighton LN, Samejima S, Hofstetter CP, Moritz CT. Transcutaneous spinal
cord stimulation restores hand and arm function after spinal cord injury. IEEE Trans
Neural Syst Rehabil Eng. 2021;29:310–319.
22. Inanici F, Samejima S, Gad P, Edgerton VR, Hofstetter CP, Moritz CT. Transcutaneous electrical spinal stimulation promotes long-term recovery of upper
extremity function in chronic tetraplegia. IEEE Trans Neural Syst Rehabil Eng.
2018;26:1272–1278.
23. Gad P, Lee S, Terrafranca N, et al. Non-invasive activation of cervical spinal networks after severe paralysis. J Neurotrauma. 2018;35:2145–2158.
24. Einhorn J, Li A, Hazan R, Knikou M. Cervicothoracic multisegmental transpinal
evoked potentials in humans. PLoS One. 2013;8:e76940.
25. Murray LM, Knikou M. Remodeling brain activity by repetitive cervicothoracic
transspinal stimulation after human spinal cord injury. Front Neurol. 2017;8:50.
26. Milosevic M, Masugi Y, Sasaki A, Sayenko DG, Nakazawa K. On the reﬂex mechanisms of cervical transcutaneous spinal cord stimulation in human subjects.
J Neurophysiol. 2019;121:1672–1679.
27. Gerasimenko Y, Gorodnichev R, Moshonkina T, Sayenko D, Gad P, Reggie
Edgerton V. Transcutaneous electrical spinal-cord stimulation in humans. Ann Phys
Rehabil Med. 2015;58:225–231.
28. Sharma P, Panta T, Ugiliweneza B, et al. Multi-site spinal cord transcutaneous
stimulation facilitates upper limb sensory and motor recovery in severe cervical
spinal cord injury: a case study. J Clin Med. 2023;12:4416.
29. Benavides FD, Jo HJ, Lundell H, Edgerton VR, Gerasimenko Y, Perez MA. Cortical
and subcortical effects of transcutaneous spinal cord stimulation in humans with
tetraplegia. J Neurosci. 2020;40:2633–2643.
30. Freyvert Y, Yong NA, Morikawa E, et al. Engaging cervical spinal circuitry with noninvasive spinal stimulation and buspirone to restore hand function in chronic
motor complete patients. Sci Rep. 2018;8:15546.
31. Wu YK, Levine JM, Wecht JR, et al. Posteroanterior cervical transcutaneous spinal
stimulation targets ventral and dorsal nerve roots. Clin Neurophysiol. 2020;131:451–
460.
32. Moritz CT, Field-Fote EC, Tefertiller C, et al. Non-invasive spinal cord electrical
stimulation for arm and hand function in chronic tetraplegia: a safety and efﬁcacy
trial. Nat Med. 2024;30:1276–1283.
33. Al’joboori Y, Massey SJ, Knight SL, Donaldson NN, Duffell LD. The effects of adding
transcutaneous spinal cord stimulation (tSCS) to sit-to-stand training in people
with spinal cord injury: a pilot study. J Clin Med. 2020;9:2765.

© 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. on behalf of the
International Neuromodulation Society. This is an open access article
under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

Neuromodulation 2025; 28: 162–173

CERVICAL TSCS PROGRAMMING RECOMMENDATIONS
34. Kumru H, Rodríguez-Cañón M, Edgerton VR, et al. Transcutaneous electrical neuromodulation of the cervical spinal cord depends both on the stimulation intensity
and the degree of voluntary activity for training. A pilot study. J Clin Med.
2021;10:3278.
35. Alizadeh A, Dyck SM, Karimi-Abdolrezaee S. Traumatic spinal cord injury: an
overview of pathophysiology, models and acute injury mechanisms. Front Neurol.
2019;10:282.
36. Oh J, Steele AG, Varghese B, et al. Cervical transcutaneous spinal stimulation for
spinal motor mapping. iScience. 2022;25:105037.
37. Ludwisiak K, Podgórski M, Biernacka K, et al. Variation in the morphology of
spinous processes in the cervical spine - an objective and parametric assessment
based on CT study. PLoS One. 2019;14:e0218885.
38. Gorodnichev RM, Pivovarova EA, Pukhov A, et al. [Transcutaneous electrical
stimulation of the spinal cord: non-invasive tool for activation of locomotor circuitry in human]. Fiziol Cheloveka. 2012;38:46–56.
39. Hofstoetter US, McKay WB, Tansey KE, Mayr W, Kern H, Minassian K. Modiﬁcation of
spasticity by transcutaneous spinal cord stimulation in individuals with incomplete
spinal cord injury. J Spinal Cord Med. 2014;37:202–211.
40. Pinter MM, Gerstenbrand F, Dimitrijevic MR. Epidural electrical stimulation of
posterior structures of the human lumbosacral cord: 3. Control of spasticity. Spinal
Cord. 2000;38:524–531.

41. Hofstoetter US, Freundl B, Danner SM, et al. Transcutaneous spinal cord stimulation induces temporary attenuation of spasticity in individuals with spinal cord
injury. J Neurotrauma. 2020;37:481–493.
42. Estes SP, Iddings JA, Field-Fote EC. Priming neural circuits to modulate spinal reﬂex
excitability. Front Neurol. 2017;8:17.
43. Rehman MU, Sneed D, Sutor TW, Hoenig H, Gorgey AS. Optimization of transspinal
stimulation applications for motor recovery after spinal cord injury: scoping
review. J Clin Med. 2023;12:854.

COMMENT
This research provides analysis of, in addition to promising details
and insights for guidance in, the use of tSCS therapy in a patient
population when there are limited treatment options for upper
extremity functional recovery in patients with SCI.
Chong Kim, MD
Cleveland, OH, USA

173

www.neuromodulationjournal.org

© 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. on behalf of the
International Neuromodulation Society. This is an open access article
under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

Neuromodulation 2025; 28: 162–173

